The article discusses the merging of the natural and the artificial in complex systems, such as the experimental capsule that recycles air and waste through plants and machines. The author argues that this marriage of the born and the made is becoming increasingly common, as machines become more biological and the biological becomes more engineered. This is due to the fact that the more complex our human-made environment becomes, the more we must turn to the logic of the natural world to manage it. The article also highlights the importance of bio-logic in assembling truly complex systems, such as a brain or an economy. Finally, the author notes that the logic of the living can be extracted from biology and applied elsewhere, as seen in the successful transfer of traits such as self-replication and partial learning to mechanical systems. The book explores the convergence of the mechanical and the lifelike, as the logic of Technos is being imported into life through bioengineering. The author argues that products that are grown rather than manufactured, such as genetically engineered crops and animals, are indicative of the kind of inventions humans will make in the future. The overlap of the mechanical and the lifelike is resulting in human-made things behaving more lifelike, and life becoming more engineered, leading to the emergence of vivisystems. The book surveys a range of vivisystems, both artificial and natural, and identifies unifying principles shared by all self-sustaining, self-improving systems. The author emphasizes the importance of nature as an idea factory and a source of post-industrial paradigms. The destruction of prairies not only eliminates a genetic reservoir but also a source of future metaphors and models for a neo-biological civilization. The combination of biology and technology will lead to machines that can learn, adapt, heal themselves, and evolve, with the potential to match human innovation. However, as living forces are introduced into machines, they become wild and uncontrollable, leading to a loss of complete sovereignty over creations. The world of the made will soon be autonomous, adaptable, and creative, but out of human control, which is seen as a positive development.