The chameleon on a mirror is a metaphor for the coevolution of a system, as explained by Gregory Bateson and Stewart Brand. Bateson believed that the chameleon's color would settle at a middle value, while Brand thought it would oscillate chaotically. The consumer in a marketplace is the modern-day chameleon, and the question is whether they settle at a middle average or oscillate in mad swings. Another student of Bateson's proposed that the chameleon would stay whatever color it was when it entered the mirror domain. This may be the most logical answer, as the coupling between mirror and chameleon is so tight that almost no adaptation is possible. For the mirrored world of marketing, this means the consumer either locks onto their initial brand or stops purchasing altogether. The question of how a chameleon would react to seeing its own reflection in a mirror has been the subject of debate among scientists for years. Some believe that the chameleon would constantly change colors, while others think it would remain the same color as when it first saw its reflection. Naturalist Peter Warshall conducted an experiment with an anole lizard, which stabilized at one color of green when placed in a mirrored box. However, Warshall acknowledges that the experiment was flawed, as anoles have a more limited range of color adaptation than true chameleons and can change colors for reasons other than matching their background. The "real" answer to the riddle depends on specific factors such as the chameleon's reaction time and sensitivity to a change in hue. Engineers can tailor feedback circuits to seek either a wide-ranging equilibrium or constant change, which is seen in networked markets. Overall, the chameleon-on-the-mirror riddle is best kept in idealized form as a thought experiment. The article explores the concept of feedback signals in different markets and how they influence the production of goods. It highlights the difference between medieval and modern societies in terms of their relationship with mirrors and self-reflection. The article then delves into the concept of causality and how it differs in the linear logic of the Western world versus the circular causality of the net. The author argues that computation exhibits nonlinear causality, where a small event can cause a large effect. The article concludes by discussing how control in natural ecologies also dissolves into a causality horizon, where the reasons for things spread to the side like a wind. The concept of coevolution, or reciprocal evolutionary change in interacting species, was first observed by fanatical butterfly collectors who discovered that encasing a caterpillar and its feeding plant in a box produced perfect specimens. This led to a rich literature of plant/butterfly communities, revealing that many butterflies in the larvae stage chomp on only one specific plant. This mutual reflection between plant and butterfly became a dance of two chameleons belly to belly, resulting in a tightly coupled evolution towards and with each other. The coevolutionary advance winds the two antagonists more inseparably until each is wholly dependent on the other's antagonism. The two become one. The term coevolution was coined in 1958 and later popularized by Stewart Brand, who launched a magazine called CoEvolution Quarterly, devoted to the larger notion of all things-biological, societal, and technological-adapting to and creating each other. In today's global world, all evolution, including the evolution of manufactured entities, is coevolution as nothing changes without also moving closer to its changing neighbors. The natural world is full of coevolution, with over 50% of species estimated to be parasitic. In the business world, alliance-making has become increasingly prevalent, particularly in the information and network industries. Symbiotic alliances in nature often involve one party gaining an advantage over the other, but both parties benefit overall. As sociability in life has increased, so too has the likelihood of mutually beneficial interactions. Coevolution breeds coevolution, with parasites upon parasites. In the future, life on Earth may be primarily social, filled with parasites and symbionts, and the world economy may be primarily a crowded network of alliances. However, coevolution can lead to absurdity and madness, as seen in the ceaseless dance between the butterfly and the milkweed. Intelligence, consciousness, and life are off-balance and unstable compared to the rest of the universe, but are held together by the recursive dynamics of coevolution. Coevolution can create emergent, coevolutionarily wired symbiosis between organisms, and all living organisms are part of a continuum of coevolution, from direct symbiosis to indirect mutual influence. The network of life on Earth transcends the life of its ingredients and ties up the entire planet in the web of its network, including the nonliving matrix of rock and gas. James Lovelock proposed a method to check for life on planets that did not require a multimillion-dollar gadget or rocket. James Lovelock, a scientist, predicted in 1967 that Mars would be lifeless based on his interpretation of its atmosphere. Lovelock could determine whether there was life on a planet by measuring the spectrum of a planet's atmosphere and determining its composition. Chemistry and coevolution led Lovelock to conclude that any planet that has life would reveal a chemistry that held odd imbalances. The Earth's atmosphere is out of kilter, wholly unbalanced by the periodic table, and alive. Life in coevolution, which has the remarkable knack of generating stable instability, moved the chemical circuitry of the Earth's atmosphere into what Lovelock calls a "persistent state of disequilibrium." The Earth's atmosphere seeks a steady oxygen level much as a thermostat hones in on a steady temperature. The uniform 20 percent oxygen level it has found turns out to be "fortuitous." The Earth's atmosphere is in a state of persistent disequilibrium due to the coevolutionary tangle of life, which keeps the chemicals of the planet off-balance. This off-balance is balanced and stable in its own way. The hallmark of life is its ability to reproduce slightly out of kilter rather than with exactitude, which keeps life proliferating. This almost-falling into chaos is contagious, and vivisystems spread their poised instability into whatever they touch. Life affects everything on Earth, including rocks, and geologists have concluded that all rocks on the Earth's surface are biogenic in nature, affected by life in some way. Russian geologist Vladimir Vernadsky was one of the first to articulate the idea that life directly shapes the physicality of the planet, calling it the "biosphere." He enraged biologists by considering the biosphere as a large chemical factory and geologists by considering rocks as if they were half-alive. The two heresies melded into a beautiful symmetry, with life as ever-renewing mineral and minerals as slow life. The entire system of evolving life and planet was coevolution, the dance of the chameleon on the mirror. Without life, the face of the Earth would become as motionless and inert as the face of the moon. James Lovelock arrived at the same conclusions based on his telescopic analysis of other planets. The biosphere and all the natural phenomena on Earth are products of living organisms or have been greatly modified by their presence, according to scientists like Vernadsky, Lamarck, and Lovelock. Lamarck's intuitive guess about the biosphere was not influential in his time since there was no scientific evidence to support his claims. Lovelock added more complex phenomena to the list of life-made, such as the possibility that clouds, rain, and snow may be biogenic. Humans intensify life further by harnessing fossil energy and breathing life into machines, making our entire manufactured infrastructure part of a wider, global-scale life. The biosphere exhibits a regulation beyond chemical equilibrium, and Vernadsky noted that organisms exhibit a type of self-government. However, the concept of self-governance as a purely mechanical process had not yet been uncovered. We now know that self-control and self-governance are not mystical vital spirits found only in life because we have built machines that contain them. James Lovelock's Gaia theory proposes that the Earth is a single living entity capable of manipulating its own atmosphere to suit its needs and endowed with faculties and powers beyond its constituent parts. Lovelock and Lynn Margulis published the theory in 1972, which has been critiqued by many biologists for expanding the definition of life without permission. Lovelock maintains that Gaia is a system that has living characteristics, making it a vivisystem. The trouble with Gaia, according to skeptics, is that it makes a dead planet into a "smart" machine. However, Lovelock argues that Gaia is a bounded whole, and its inert, mechanistic parts are part of its life. The idea that artificial learning can evolve unbidden at a planetary scale seems ludicrous. However, evolution itself is a type of learning, and learning occurs wherever evolution is, even if artificially. Scientists are cataloguing the elemental components for adaptation, induction, intelligence, evolution, and coevolution into a periodic table of life. Coevolution is a variety of learning, and coevolving creatures are both learning and teaching each other at the same time. The give and take of a coevolutionary relationship, teaching and learning at once, reminded many scientists of game playing. John von Neumann invented a mathematical theory of games, which he defined as a conflict of interests resolved by the accumulative choices players make while trying to anticipate each other. Von Neumann was particularly interested in seeing if he could develop optimal strategies for these kinds of mutual games because at first glance, they seemed almost insolvable in theory. The article discusses the concept of cooperation and how it can emerge out of self-interest in various scenarios. It introduces four simple games called "social dilemmas" - Chicken, Stag Hunt, Deadlock, and the Prisoner's Dilemma - which are building blocks of complicated coevolutionary games. The article focuses on the Iterated Prisoner Dilemma game, which involves playing the game repeatedly and learning from each other. The article discusses the strategies of play for the game that result in the highest scores over the long term. It also talks about a tournament conducted in 1980 by Robert Axelrod, which pitted 14 submitted strategies of the Prisoner's Dilemma against each other to see which one would triumph. The winner was a very simple strategy crafted by psychologist Anatol Rapoport called Tit-For-Tat. The article challenges the orthodox political reasoning that cooperation could only develop with the help of a benign central authority, and suggests that societies with good communications could develop cooperative structures without heavy central control. The article concludes that cooperation can emerge out of self-interest and is not a new age spiritualism. The article discusses the concept of coevolutionary games, which are played by any kind of adaptive agent, not just humans. The games involve a fundamental tradeoff between exploration and exploitation, which every complex adaptive organization must balance. The article explores the Prisoner's Dilemma game, which was played by 14 players in a round-robin tournament on a computer. Kristian Lindgren expanded the game in 1990 by increasing the population of players to 1,000 and introducing random noise into the games. The results showed that masses of dumb agents playing Prisoner's Dilemma reenacted the ecological oscillations of fox and hare and created many other natural phenomena such as parasitism, spontaneously emerging symbiosis, and long-term stable coexistence between species. Lindgren's work also displayed long periods of stability, interrupted by sudden, short-lived episodes of instability, which matches the general pattern of evolution found in earthly fossils, known as punctuated equilibrium. The article concludes by stating that it is important to consider these coevolutionary forces when managing them. The concept of coevolutionary games teaches that pure strategies are not resilient to competing strategies, but a little randomness creates long-term stability. Coevolution is a nonzero-sum game, where the whole can reward or cripple all members. The Tit-For-Tat strategy always wins in a coevolutionary game because it mirrors the other's actions and has the highest cumulative score. Hard-nosed CEOs recognize that companies can make billions without beating others in a win-win scenario. Robert Axelrod hopes his work on the evolution of cooperation helps the world avoid conflict, and his theories were used to analyze the cold war. Gorbachev saw that the Soviets could get more security with fewer tanks rather than more tanks. The article discusses the concept of coevolution and how it applies to various aspects of life, including politics, economics, and ecology. It argues that control and secrecy are counterproductive in coevolutionary worlds, and that open communication and information exchange are essential for stability and growth. The collapse of Soviet command-style economies is cited as an example of the benefits of open information. The article also suggests that the Network Era, characterized by dense communication, is creating opportunities for emergent coevolution, self-organization, and win-win cooperation.