The article discusses the role of fog in sustaining life in a desert land, and how the shape of the land steers water and indirectly, life. The result is a patchwork landscape of local enclaves of codependency, continuously almost-falling in a coevolutionary embrace. Wind and spring floods erode soils, exposing underlying layers and premiering new compositions of humus and minerals on the surface. The mix of plants and animals coupled to it likewise churn, and different habitats roam over the land in time. The article emphasizes the importance of change in sustaining deserts, and how forests and other habitats migrate across the landscape to the beat of the changing climate. Ecologist Janice Burgess has concluded that variable rainfall is the key to the desert, and that equilibrium is dead. Burgess argues that it is turbulence and variance that really gives richness to nature. She finds nature's reliance on disturbances and variance to be a practical issue, and hopes the flux of the desert can teach us how to live with a variable environment without simplifying it. A major shift in ecological understanding occurred in the era when cheap computers made nonequilibrial and nonlinear equations easy to program. The article discusses the potential for information networks to coordinate the irregular output of a fluctuating ecosystem, but acknowledges the lack of industrial economic models that are variance-driven. It then explores the concept of instability in nature and the relationship between stability and diversity. Biologists have used computer models to study stability in ecosystems and have found that beyond a certain threshold, increasing complexity can decrease the ability of a system to rebound after disturbances. However, repeated assembly of complex systems can eventually lead to stability and order. The stability of ecosystems is dependent on the length of food chains, with longer chains being less stable in the face of environmental disruption. Additionally, ecosystems tend to have a tradeoff between many loosely coupled members or few tightly coupled members. Connectance, or the strength of coupledness between nodes in a network, is conserved in biological systems and is likely conserved in cultural, economic, and mechanical systems as well. However, connectance is constantly in flux. Nature is not constant, but rather in a state of constant flux and reinvention. Similarly, human institutions must also be in a state of constant flux and reinvention. The article discusses the concept of ecological succession, where a given area tends to shift until it reaches a mature, ultimate, stable harmony, known as the climax community. The mutual needs of diverse species click together so smartly in the climax arrangement that the whole is difficult to disrupt. The article suggests that a mature ecosystem resembles the coherence belonging to an organism, and perhaps a maple forest is but a grand organism composed of lesser organisms. The article concludes with a quote from Aldo Leopold, stating that in terms of conventional physics, a grouse represents only a millionth of either the mass or the energy of an acre, yet subtract the grouse, and the whole thing is dead. The concept of a superorganism, where a community of creatures acts as a single entity, was popular among biologists in the 1920s. Frederic Clements believed that a forest was a superorganism, while H. A. Gleason thought it was a fortuitous association of organisms. William Hamilton's computer models found that very few ecological systems were able to self-organize into lasting coherence. Gleason was right that ecological communities are more flexible and transient than organisms, with species trying out different roles and partnerships over time in a long dress rehearsal. Ultimately, ecology is an identity workshop for biological forms. The article explores the differences between evolutionary and ecological change and how they relate to hierarchy and diversity. Evolutionary change is a tightly bound, cerebral process, while ecological change is more body-bound and circuitous. Evolution requires connectance among its participants to exert its power, with tightly coupled systems experiencing more structured adaptation. Ecology, in contrast, is governed by the complexity embodied by flesh. The article also discusses the origins of diversity, with microbiologist Julian Adams discovering that life can spontaneously diversify even in a constant, featureless environment. The article discusses the importance of a rugged environment in promoting diversity in ecological communities. A smooth, uniform environment would lead to a single, ultradistributed superorganism with little diversity. In contrast, a varied environment creates opportunities for adaptation and symbiotic relationships. The article also notes that computer simulations of life-like behavior benefit from a rich environment for simple creatures rather than complex creatures. The author reflects on the diversity of plant species in a rugged environment and notes the intricate details of a Queen Anne's lace leaf. The author reflects on the diversity of life on Earth, but ultimately concludes that all life comes from one conglomerate and is interconnected. Life is a distributed being, with no individual organisms living alone. Life is an ecological property, and once born, it is immortal and cannot be eradicated. Life infiltrates everywhere and saturates the atmosphere, the Earth's surface, and even bedrock cracks. The author suggests that there was a time billions of years ago when life crossed a threshold of irreversibility, and before that point, life was tenuous. Life is incredibly resilient and persistent due to the complexity of its dynamics, which has exceeded the complexity of all known destructive forces. Once established, life is hardy and irrepressible, with single-cell bacteria being capable of living in every possible antagonistic environment. The complexity of the human body leads to stubborn persistence in life, with the average human organism taking 70 years of full-time attack to break the bounds of human life. In contrast, nonliving complexity has a much shorter lifespan. Complex systems, such as animals and plants, are heavily buffered from easy disruption and regularly survive drastic violence and injury. We should heed the unstoppable nature of life when creating complex machines, as they won't go away once born. The article discusses the concept of vivisystems, which are complex systems that exhibit a high degree of interconnectedness and self-organization. The article argues that vivisystems are more than the sum of their parts and that their complexity allows them to be more alive and resilient. The article also discusses the idea that death is difficult for complex systems and that they have a "bargain" with the whole, where the parts sacrifice themselves for the greater good. The article concludes by suggesting that as long as the universe continues to cool down, life will continue to build up in more curious varieties and in further mutual networks. Life tends to complexify matter and modify environments to create spaces for further life. The conquest of air by living organisms and the saturation of oceans may take time, but eventually, life will dominate and fill the universe. The life force is a computational function that expands at a certain velocity, but the theoretical limits to the infection of matter by life and the maximum amount of life-enhanced matter that our sun could support are unknown. Some scientists believe that the universe is a computer, and matter and energy are forms of information processing. Life is a nonspiritual, mathematical property that can emerge from network-like arrangements of matter, according to an article in Nautilus. The author argues that life is aggressive and infiltrates all matter, and that the higher processing power of the mind inevitably conquers life and all matter. Theoretical physicist Freeman Dyson has estimated that life and intelligence could survive until the ultimate end of the universe, and that mind will eventually come into its heritage. The view that life is an emergent property contingent upon the organization of inanimate parts but not reducible to them comes very close to sounding like a metaphysical doctrine, but it is intended to be testable. The emergent doctrine of life is based on the principles of unpredictability, replication, and self-protection, which challenge traditional notions of the laws of nature. Life can be seen as an autonomous process divorced from both living bodies and mechanical matrix. The fourth discontinuity between humans and machines is being crossed, and the most meaningful discoveries in the coming century will celebrate the unified quality of technology and life. The commonality between machines and creatures is the dynamics of self-organized change. The question of "What does life want?" and "What does evolution want?" can reveal their selfish goals and direction. Wildness is a many-pointed truth, a sudden essence like the wild strawberries strung along the ground on scarlet runners underfoot, and it has no purpose other than itself. The author describes wildness as a network of vital life that seeks to enlarge itself and push its disequilibrium into all matter, erupting in creatures and machines alike. Wildness is always becoming and is on its way to further complications, deepness, and mystery. Life is a circle of becoming, an autocatalytic set, breeding upon itself more life, wildness, and becomingness. Wild life resembles the strange loop of the Uroborus biting its tail, but in reality, it is the far stranger loop of a snake releasing itself from its own grip, birthing an ever larger tail and filling the universe with this strangeness.