The language of evolution emphasizes change, but rarely discusses steadfastness. The term "evolution" is often used to describe incremental change over time, but not all long-term change is evolutionary. The concept of revolution, or drastic discontinuous change, was introduced by technology. However, daily revolution will be replaced by daily evolution, as science and commerce seek to instill structured and autonomous change to produce a constant tide of microrevolutions instead of disruptive macrorevolutions. The science of evolution is becoming valuable not only to biologists, but to engineers as well. The study of evolution, both natural and artificial, is becoming increasingly important as the rate of change in our world accelerates. Artificial evolution is the second course in a new biology of creatures and the first course in a new biology of machines. It allows technology to change itself and promotes adaptation. However, natural evolution is blind towards the future and has no record of its successes or achievements. Organisms do not keep track of their achievements, and nature does not transmit information in both directions within organisms, which would allow for Lamarckian evolution. Lamarckian evolution requires an organism to have a working index to its genes, and the body of an organism can communicate with other organs through hardwired hormone and chemical circuits. The body has the ability to communicate with genes, but it lacks the bookkeeping ability to pinpoint which genes to use for specific tasks. This lack of communication is due to the decentralized nature of the genome, which has no central gene-authority to direct traffic. However, recent research suggests that when an organism acquires sufficient complexity in its body, it can use its body to teach the genes what they need to know to evolve. This mechanism is a hybrid of evolution and learning, and it has great potential in artificial realms. Lamarckian evolution is possible and advantageous where complexity is rich enough for intelligence, such as in human organisms and organizations and their robotic offspring. An adaptation spearheaded by the body (a somatic adaptation) is assimilated over time by the genes. The concept of genetic assimilation, or the Baldwin effect, refers to the natural selection of traits that control the range of evolution, allowing for quicker adaptation to changing environments. Somatic and behavioral adaptation, such as the ability to acclimatize to high altitudes or the learned behavior of a finch using a cactus needle to poke for insects, can be assimilated into an organism's genes over time. It is more efficient to invest in a flexible phenotype, as it allows for adaptation without waiting for a mutation, but it is also expensive as accommodating one stress can decrease an organism's ability to accommodate another. In essence, behavior can move the body and explore the space of possible adaptations, ultimately influencing an organism's evolution. The link between learning, behavior, adaptation, and evolution has only recently been investigated, mostly through computer simulations. Organisms have the ability to reshape themselves within their lifetime through various types of plasticity, including morphological, physiological, behavioral, intelligent, and traditional. These adaptations within a lifetime can be considered varieties of inheritable learning. Studies have shown that populations of organisms that are learning evolve faster than those that are not. Self-guided learning has also been found to increase adaptation rates. Learning and behavior may be among the causes of genetic evolution. Artificial evolution may require artificial learning and intelligence to accelerate the speed of evolution. Learning plus evolution is the recipe for culture, and genes may pass their information off onto learning and behavior. The history of human evolution is marked by the gradual shift from biological to cultural transmission of knowledge and skills. As societies develop, cultural assimilation becomes more dominant, leading to a symbiotic relationship between culture and biology. Sociobiologists E.O. Wilson and Charles Lumsden suggest that cultural evolution can pull along significant genetic change so that it catches up in only a thousand years. Culture and biology are inseparably linked, with genetic change being a prerequisite for cultural change. In the absence of culture, humans seem to lose distinctly human talents. The relationship between culture and biology is one of mutually beneficial parasites, according to Danny Hillis, with culture rewiring biology to be more susceptible to further culturalization. This implies that culture produces organisms that are biologically more able to produce, learn, and adapt in cultural ways. The advantages of Lamarckian evolution are so great that nature has found ways to make it happen, with evolution searching for the advantages of Lamarckian evolution without realizing it. As human brains evolved, they created culture, which permitted the birth of a true Lamarckian system of inherited acquisitions. Darwinian evolution is not just slow learning, but "dumb learning," and what evolution eventually found in the human brain was the complexity needed to peer ahead in anticipation and direct evolution's course. Evolution is a structure of organized change that is itself undergoing change and reorganization. The evolution of evolution can be traced through six historical stages: auto-genesis of systems, replication, genetic control, somatic plasticity, memetic culture, and self-directed evolution. The first stage was the evolution of a matrix of self-generating complexity, followed by self-replicating stabilities and the evolution of natural selection. The mechanics of inheritance then split from mechanics of survival, and evolution evolved the dual system of genotype and phenotype. As evolution evolved more complex body forms and behaviors, it made bodies that reshaped themselves, and animals that chose their own niches. This led to the evolution of a complex symbolic learning machine, the human brain, which evolved culture and memetic evolution. The ultimate goal of evolution is to create all possible possibilities by creating the spaces in which they could be. Hyperevolution does this by continually increasing its reach, creating new libraries of possible places to explore, and searching for better, more creative ways to create. The theory of evolution has taken on a quasi-religious role, serving as a general postulate to which all theories, hypotheses, and systems must satisfy in order to be considered true. Evolution has become a powerful folk-tale about human origins, with a framework that is encompassing and almost self-evident. The logical aspects of evolution cannot be divorced from the other things this powerful notion does to us as humans. The unexamined consequences of evolution will shape our future in the long term and may touch our souls.