The article discusses the importance of change and instability in sustaining life in deserts, and how ecosystems are in a state of constant flux and reinvention. The stability of ecosystems is dependent on the length of food chains and the tradeoff between many loosely coupled members or few tightly coupled members. Connectance, or the strength of coupledness between nodes in a network, is conserved in biological systems and likely conserved in cultural, economic, and mechanical systems as well. The article explores the concept of ecological succession and the climax community, where a given area tends to shift until it reaches a mature, ultimate, stable harmony. The article suggests that a mature ecosystem resembles the coherence belonging to an organism, and perhaps a maple forest is but a grand organism composed of lesser organisms. The article concludes with a discussion of the differences between evolutionary and ecological change and how they relate to hierarchy and diversity. The article discusses the differences between evolution and ecology, with evolution being a cerebral process requiring connectance among its participants and ecology being more body-bound and circuitous. The importance of a rugged environment in promoting diversity in ecological communities is also highlighted. The author reflects on the diversity of life on Earth and concludes that all life comes from one conglomerate and is interconnected. The article also discusses the concept of vivisystems, which are complex systems that exhibit a high degree of interconnectedness and self-organization. The article argues that vivisystems are more than the sum of their parts and that their complexity allows them to be more alive and resilient. The article concludes by suggesting that as long as the universe continues to cool down, life will continue to build up in more curious varieties and in further mutual networks. The emergent doctrine of life suggests that life is an autonomous process that is not reducible to inanimate parts, and it is based on the principles of unpredictability, replication, and self-protection. The commonality between machines and creatures is the dynamics of self-organized change, and the most meaningful discoveries in the coming century will celebrate the unified quality of technology and life. Wildness is a network of vital life that seeks to enlarge itself, and it has no purpose other than itself. Life is a circle of becoming, an autocatalytic set, breeding upon itself more life, wildness, and becomingness. The author suggests that the view of life as an emergent property challenges traditional notions of the laws of nature and is intended to be testable.