The article discusses the open-ended nature of life and how it continually expands the possibilities of its own being. The limitations of predetermined genetic systems in creating open-ended evolution are discussed, and Karl Sims' use of a genome composed of small equations to create an open-ended artificial world is introduced. The use of logic units instead of digital bits allowed for an opened-ended universe where new kinds of functions and things could emerge. The article also discusses the use of evolutionary programming to solve complex problems by combining and modifying mathematical equations. The resulting equations are often messy and inelegant, with redundant and circuitous logic, but the method can yield solutions that work. The article concludes by discussing the irony that human consciousness struggles to think in parallel, despite the brain running as a parallel machine, and how evolution is an answer to teaching computers how to learn to solve problems without being explicitly reprogrammed for every new problem. The article explores the potential for creating open-ended evolution through artificial intelligence. The author argues that evolution can be used to reach goals that cannot be reached by other means and to open up entirely new places to explore. The article discusses the use of evolution as a tool for engineering and creating open-ended evolution, including the potential for creating autonomous and self-sustained evolution. The article also discusses the concept of artificial life, which involves creating alternative life-forms to better understand the general principles and theories of life. The author argues that the most important thing to remember about A-life is that the part that is artificial is not the life, but the materials. The field of artificial life aims to create synthetic life and map the space of all possible life, including hyperlife, which encompasses both organic and artificial life. Scientists aim to create examples of "life-as-it-could-be" by transplanting living behaviors into different materials. The ultimate goal is to create a few lines of code that can run for centuries, similar to an acorn that turns into a 180-year-old tree. However, the article raises concerns about the responsibility that comes with creating life and the potential for humans to create their own successors. The author envisions a future where we will create an open-ended world that can keep creating perpetual novelty. Danny Hillis wants to create a computer that can give open-ended life and freedom, while Tom Ray wants to upload computers into life.