The article discusses the 1959 Macy Conferences, which brought together scientists from different fields to discuss interdisciplinary topics, including cybernetics. Cybernetics, the art and science of control, considered living things as machines and machines as living things. The conferences produced important concepts such as feedback control, circular causality, homeostasis in machines, and political game theory. However, the cybernetic movement died in the late 1970s due to a lack of funding, limited experimentation, and "putting the observer inside the box". The author explores the uneven landscape of scientific knowledge, which is lumpy and characterized by vast deserts of ignorance between small areas of knowledge. Anomalies are set aside until they prove too great, troublesome, or numerous to ignore, and a young turk proposes a revolutionary different model that explains the anomalies. The Kuhnian model of science suggests that anomalies lead to paradigm shifts, but some anomalies are not perceived as such until after a new conceptual framework is established. Anomalies are the result, not the cause, of paradigm shifts. The article concludes by discussing the inclusive fitness theory in sociobiology as an example of a workable explanation that made animal altruism no longer an anomaly. The author of "Complex Adaptive Systems: An Introduction to Computational Models of Social Life" presents a list of questions about complex adaptive systems that remain unanswered. These questions include the vagueness of the term "emergent," the difficulty in measuring complexity and requisite variety, and the limits of simulation and artificial life. The author also questions the stability and evolution of complex systems, the role of "God" as a technical term, and the web of knowledge created by the Citation Index and hypertext. While hypertext allows for a nonsequential and interactive relationship between writer and reader, it lacks simple psychological clues found in printed books. The article explores the differences between printed books and hypertext as spaces for ideas, knowledge, and thought. The article discusses the impact of the internet and hypertext on the way we read and understand texts. The author argues that hypertext allows for a new role for readers, where the truth of a work changes with each reading and there is no canon. The fragmentation of meaning is called "deconstruction," and the total summation of knowledge is a web of ideas that accelerates reciprocity through hypertext and electronic writing. The computer promotes heterogeneity, individualization, and autonomy, and swarm-works have opened up a new thinking space. The author explores the concept of thinking space and how future technologies, such as bioengineering, could shift our time scale and expand our ability to think beyond the current ten-year bubble. The space of possible ways of thinking may be vast, with the number of ways to overcome a problem or create new ideas being as large as the number of ideas itself.