Stuart Kauffman developed the idea of "order for free," which suggests that certain patterns are inevitable due to distributed bottom-up control and everything-is-connected-to-everything type of cell management. He used computers to model this mathematically, creating a set of techniques known as "net math," which incorporates the lateral causality of thousands of simultaneous interacting functions. Kauffman believes that this kind of weird swarm logic and the inevitable order it birthed were more universal than special and could be found in other swarm models such as spin glasses. The article discusses how the complexity of systems, such as genetic systems and swarm systems, makes it difficult to predict their behavior without running equations or simulations. Stuart Kauffman developed a mathematical model of a genetic system that could simulate any swarm system. Kauffman argues that circular causality is essential for stable systems, and cognitive philosopher Douglas Hofstadter calls these paradoxical circuits "Strange Loops." The article suggests that life began in a soup of polymers that interacted to form new polymers, eventually leading to the formation of autocatalytic sets. The author argues that autocatalytic sets are a natural expression of polymer chemistry and that they are inevitable given the right conditions. Stuart Kauffman is studying autocatalytic sets to understand how they can create new codes, chemicals, or inventions. He believes a finite set of functions generates an infinite set of possibilities, which he calls a "Kauffman machine." Kauffman's simulations suggest that ultra-connectance produces ultra-ruggedness, leading to grid-lock. The lambda parameter predicts the likelihood that a particular set of rules for a swarm will produce a "sweet spot" of interesting behavior. The concept of the "edge of chaos" explains how a system can maintain a precarious balance between rigidity and chaos, allowing for optimal learning, adaptation, and evolution. The universe itself and life, as we know it, are poised on the edge of chaos, and there would be tremendous evolutionary advantage in biology for a complex system that was auto-poised. The concept of self-tuning is proposed as the key to open-ended evolution. Researchers at the Santa Fe Institute are exploring the idea that the ability to take advantage of natural selection would have been one of the first traits selected in the evolution of life. They are searching for the "sweet spot" where life is on the edge, not too regular and not too chaotic, but with some dangerous edge in between. The ideal system would be poised to take advantage of natural selection and evolve to become more complex.