The Second Law of Thermodynamics, which explains the tendency of order to succumb to chaos, has been the key framework for understanding most of physics, chemistry, and quantum mechanics. However, biology lacks a grand theory, and theoretical biologists are searching for a Second Law of Biology, a law of rising order. The universe is subject to two opposing forces, Carnot's Second Law, and the rising flow, which diverts heat before it disperses and borrows failing energy to extract order out of disorder. The idea of the rising flow implies a directional charge within the universe, and progress in evolution smells of human-centeredness, which some consider religious. While there may not be progress in evolution, there may be a general direction, but many neodarwinians have banned any notions of trends or direction in evolution whatsoever. Steven Jay Gould's book "Wonderful Life" presents the idea that if the history of life on Earth could be rewound and played again, it would not follow the same path as before. The article discusses the idea of whether evolution is inevitable or directed. Gould argues that the idea of evolutionary trends is not supported by the evidence and that the future of life cannot be predicted. The article discusses the concept of purpose in machines and biological evolution, exploring seven trends in organic evolution that provide insight into its inherent teleogism. The author discusses seven trends of hyperevolution that will bias artificial evolution when it goes marathon, including irreversibility, increasing complexity, increasing diversity, increasing numbers of individuals, increasing specialization, increasing codependency, and increasing evolvability. The article explores the concept of increasing complexity, diversity, and numbers of individuals over time, noting that life has continued to evolve into more complex organisms. The Burgess Shale fossils show a range of alien organisms thriving during the innovation boom of the Cambrian, leading to a rethinking of what we mean by diversity. Finally, the article explores the concept of increasing evolvability, where evolution evolves itself, suggesting that evolution selects not just for survivability, but for the ability to evolve in certain directions or at all. The evolution of evolution is the process by which change is altered and perpetually generates perpetual change and persistent disequilibrium. The article discusses the concept of hyperevolution, which refers to the evolution of evolution itself. Natural selection selects individuals, and what constitutes an individual evolves, shifting the tangled hierarchy to a new level of selection. The author argues that the process of evolution is not driven by a specific goal or entity, but rather towards actualizing itself. Evolution generates complexity and diversity, allowing it to evolve further and become a more powerful evolver. The self-evolver must be a coyote trickster, constantly remaking itself and becoming more convoluted, flexible, and dependent on itself.