The article discusses the difficulty of predicting the future, especially in complex adaptive systems, but emphasizes the importance of prediction as a form of control. The author visits Doyne Farmer, who is starting a company to predict stock prices using computer simulations. The article uses examples such as an outfielder's "theory" of missiles and a balloon's flight path to illustrate the evolvability of models based on experiential data. While chaotic systems are unpredictable, chaos theory suggests that short-term predictability is possible. The Prediction Company, founded by a group of mathematicians and physicists, aims to exploit the flip side of chaos by detecting patterns in the stock market. The article suggests that "positive myopia," or limited look-ahead, is useful in compensating for insufficient information and making decisions. The article discusses the development of prediction and simulation machinery, particularly in the areas of financial markets and military simulations. The Prediction Company and Citibank use algorithms to predict market moves, while John Henry's company uses "computerized intuition" to predict various phenomena. The US military has been using war-gaming simulations for decades to predict and prepare for potential conflicts, with Central Command in Florida serving as the nerve center. The article also describes the development of swarm computing, a decentralized, massively parallel computing system that was used to speed up a computer simulation of a tank battle. Successful traders detect patterns, then make an internal model in order to make predictions, sharpening the feedback loop. Prediction machinery is ultimately theory-making machinery, devices for generating abstractions and generalizations. The article discusses the use of war gaming simulations in predicting the outcome of the Gulf War and questions the idea of using predictive technology to forecast the future of human society. The article identifies three pockets of predictability in the greater web of human interactions: invariants, growth curves, and cyclic waves. The article suggests that while long-term predictions may be unreliable, short-term predictions for complex systems are feasible and becoming more so with advancements in technology. The article also explores the concept of feedback control, which involves using past performance to inform future decisions. Life arose on a planet with transparent air and water, allowing organisms to develop prediction machinery to anticipate future events and adapt to changing environments. Similarly, the digitization of human activity and the creation of a transparent medium through data circulation allows for the development of predictive machinery. The Limits to Growth model, created by Forrester and Meadows, attempted to model the complex adaptive system of human infrastructure on Earth. The model warned of the dangers of environmental degradation and the need for sustainable practices, but its limitations highlighted the need for a more flexible and informed approach to modeling. The model lacks room for learning and adaptation, ignores the importance of geography and locality, and cannot model open-ended growth. A better world model should possess the dynamics to transform itself to the next level on its own, incorporate distributed learning, local and regional variation, and increasing complexification, and possess a "requisite complexity" to keep up with the complexity of the modeled system. The dream is to create a system that mirrors the real evolving world, but this requires a more flexible and informed approach. The key insight is that a system needs a flexible structure to evolve into something new. Direct feedback models are limited in achieving stabilization without the ability to learn, grow or diversify. Importing evolution and learning requires exporting control, which is impossible in self-making systems like vivisystems. The direction of large swarm-like systems such as human society is controlled by a multitude of interconnecting, self-contradictory agents. While no one is in charge, individuals can learn to anticipate what is immediately ahead.