Biosphere 2 was a two-year closure experiment where eight humans, or biospherians, lived in a miniature surrogate Gaia. The presence of humans was central to the experiment, as they yielded a completely unexpected medical result of increased levels of pesticides and herbicides in their blood. The Biosphere 2 experiment aimed to create a self-sustaining environment, but the reality was complicated and expensive. The ecosystem inside the dome proved more tenacious than expected, and the biospherians had to coevolve along with it. The Biosphere 2 experiment revealed surprising insights into the behavior of the atmosphere, with the air inside the closed habitat unexpectedly clean and carbon dioxide levels meandering up and down. The article discusses the Biosphere 2 experiment, a man-made ecosystem that aimed to create a self-sustaining closed system. The experiment aimed to explore the links between an operating atmosphere and a living biosphere, and it included a mechanical "technosphere" that supported the biological system. The article suggests that the Biosphere experiment is promising for gaining a better understanding of the global atmosphere and the fate of carbon in the Earth's atmosphere. The project has three main purposes: to optimize production, to gain independence from technology, and to serve as a step towards space exploration. Biosphere 2 represents a planetary metamorphosis, where humans are involved in the reproduction of the Earth's biosystem. The author reflects on their experience of being alone in the Biosphere, a self-contained ecosystem in the Arizona desert, and discusses the importance of life and the potential for engineered life to replace machines. They believe that life is the ultimate technology and that the Biosphere is a noble experiment that will teach us about the Earth and the countless other species we depend on. The merging of the organic and the mechanical in the Biosphere 2 blurs the line between the living and the manufactured, and the author suggests that a journey inside yields more questions than answers. The author concludes that spending two years in Biosphere 2 would feel like a lifetime.