The article discusses the concept of the Library of Babel, a vast library containing all possible books, as described by Jorge Luis Borges in an interview. The narrator of the article becomes tempted to find the best possible book he could write in the library and sets off on a search. However, he finds only books filled with gibberish and nonsense. The narrator discovers a method to find coherent books in the vast library by climbing uphill, toward books with better grammar, until reaching the peak of a wholly grammatical book. The article then discusses the concept of artificial evolution, where the essence of evolution has moved from carbon to silicon, and it is fundamentally natural to computers. Karl Sims has created a Borgian Library of art and pictures using the Connection Machine 5 (CM5) and software he wrote. The CM5 can generate a vast universe of all possible pictures, just as it can generate a possible book. The text explores the concept of the Borgian universe, where texts exist independently of form and have assigned spots on a virtual shelf. It discusses Richard Dawkins' computer program, Biomorph Land, which generates tree-like shapes through selective breeding and artificial selection. Dawkins discovered that the program could create complex insect-like creatures, leading to the creation of a library of organic shapes. The program's visual nature made it appealing to artists, and John Latham collaborated with programmers to create the Mutator, which combined the evolutionary engine of Dawkins with Latham's 3D forms to create a vast library of organic shapes. The text also discusses the lost book of palindromes and the search for a specific biomorph, which were both eventually found. The program's unpredictability and infinite number of possible pathways made it feel like wandering through a labyrinth, but the distillation of functional forms through genetic engineering prevented the appearance of nonsensical forms. The article discusses the use of artificial evolution in creating new forms of art and design. William Latham and Karl Sims both used evolution to explore and create new forms beyond their imagination. The article explains how artificial evolution can be manipulated and controlled in computer programs, allowing for different types of mating and the development of a Mutator. The potential for an artificial intelligence module to analyze a breeder's progress and retrieve a form that encapsulates a desired trait is also discussed. The article also describes the development of El-Fish, a program that allows users to breed virtual aquarium fish for aesthetic purposes. The program represents a new form of art known as evolutionism, where artists use borrowed concepts of mutation and reproduction to evolve computer graphic models. The Texture Mutator is a tool for generating textures through exploratory evolution, allowing artists to create beauty through a system rather than analytical control. Finally, the article discusses the potential of evolutionary design techniques for profitable projects, such as car body shapes and packaging design, and sees it as useful for all kinds of design problems entailing large numbers of parameters. The copyright status of artificially evolved creations is uncertain, as it is unclear who should receive protection. The process of evolution can help to outsmart the problem of finding a specific creation in a large library of all possible creations, but intelligence is a tunnel through it. The author discusses the process of writing a book, highlighting the seemingly infinite number of possible choices for each sentence. They describe how they "evolved" their book by finding it in the Library of Borges, word by word. The satisfaction of the long search was that only the author could find their book.