The article discusses the limitations of Darwinian theory and the emergence of postdarwinian theories of evolution. The article notes that while neodarwinism attempts to explain everything in life through adaptive selection, other forces may be at work in evolution. The article explores the limitations of Darwinian theory and suggests the existence of other mechanisms of evolution, such as symbiosis. Symbiosis, the merging of two organisms into one, is found to be fundamental in microbial life and can lead to the creation of complex systems unlikely to develop incrementally. The article also suggests that genetic information can be shared through intercell gene transfer, leading to a view of all bacteria as a single genetically interacting superorganism. The advent of ubiquitous computers has birthed a third way of doing science: by simulation. Artificial evolution is at once a theory and test for natural evolution, and something original in itself. The article discusses the role of symbiosis in evolution, highlighting its advantages in promoting cooperation and diversity. It critiques traditional selection theory, arguing that genetics has paid more attention to the origin of innovation and variation. The prevailing logic is that mutations are not truly random, and while individual mutations may range from near-random to plausible, statistically, over the long haul, a mass of mutations behaves randomly. The article also suggests that variations can be chosen deliberately by the gene bureaucracy. The internal structure of organisms, particularly the genome, and the accumulated morphogenesis of development may have a greater influence on the variety of biological organizations possible than natural selection. The egg cell plays a significant role in the implementation of genes during sex and directs the chromosomal genes as they differentiate, guiding and orchestrating the construction of the baby. The article discusses the limitations of natural selection in explaining the complexity of evolution and suggests that artificial evolution may provide a way to synthesize evolution outside of biology. The author argues that neodarwinism fails to account for other components of evolution, such as symbiosis, directed mutation, saltationism, and self-organization. The lack of intermediates in the fossil record is a significant issue, and while the appearance of hopeful monsters could explain the absence of transitional forms, it is still a topic of debate in evolutionary theory. The article suggests that artificial evolution can demonstrate spontaneous self-selection as a means of adaptation and generate initial novelty, but to become a powerhouse of creativity like natural evolution, it needs further creative aspects of natural evolution. The author concludes that evolution is not solely a biological process and that exploring artificial evolution can illuminate the true character of historical evolution. The article discusses the complexity of natural selection and the need for a more complex mathematics of life to explain evolution, including the origin of life, trend towards complexity, and invention of intelligence. The author argues that natural selection is not equivalent to evolution, which is pluralistic and multifaceted, with various evolutions proceeding at different scales, tempos, and styles. The article also discusses the potential for artificial evolution to breed machines and software, and outlines four dynamics that would be present in a functioning artificial evolution capable of sustainable creativity: symbiosis, directed mutations, saltationism, and self-organization. However, the author notes that there will be limitations to what artificial evolution can create, and that understanding the biases and inabilities of organic evolution can help identify the vacant spaces in the landscape of possible creatures.