Tom Ray created an artificial life program called Tierra, where computer programs evolved and reproduced. He introduced two key features that turned his program into an evolution machine: scrambling digital bits during copying and assigning creatures a priority tag for an executioner. Tierra led to the discovery of hyperparasites, social cheaters, creatures that surpassed human software engineering skills, and the emergence of sex. Ray observed that interrupted asexual reproduction resulted in wild new recombinations that fueled evolution and punctuated equilibrium. Ray is now working on a Darwin Chip, which could be used to evolve lines of code or entire software programs. The article also discusses the use of evolutionary algorithms in computer programs to optimize solutions to complex problems. The article discusses the history and potential of evolutionary algorithms in computer science and problem-solving. John Holland's genetic algorithms (GAs) mimic nature's evolutionary process to solve complex problems, creating populations of code that evolve and mutate simultaneously. Parallelism is key to GAs' success, allowing for the testing of multiple combinations at once to locate the global optima. The article also discusses the challenges of using evolutionary algorithms, such as the risk of getting stuck on local peaks instead of finding the global optimum. Danny Hillis has used the Connection Machine to simulate evolution with a population of simple software programs, leading to the evolution of a sorting program previously unknown to computer scientists. The article also discusses the potential of artificial evolution in creating intelligence and consciousness, with the slow pace of evolution being a concern. The article explores the potential of artificial evolution in shaping our digital society. Evolutionary systems offer a new approach to traditional drug design, allowing for the creation of alternative versions of natural drugs that may have advantages such as being smaller, producing fewer side effects, or being more specific in their targets. The article discusses the difficulty of incorporating the dual nature of heritable information and mortal bodies into an evolutionary system and how biochemist Gerald Joyce has recreated a probable earlier stage of life on Earth, "RNA world," in a test tube to develop a robust artificial evolutionary system. The article also discusses the work of Christopher Langton and his experiments with artificial life, exploring the concept of genetic engineering and how it affects the survival of a species. The article concludes by highlighting the potential for artificial evolution to be used in a host of other adaptive systems and entirely different search strategies to shape them. The article explores the potential of different methods of evolution and learning in software development, including Lamarckian and Darwinian evolution and ant algorithms. Lamarckian evolution, which allows for acquired information to be incorporated into long-term learning, is found to produce smarter solutions than Darwinian evolution. Ant algorithms mimic the behavior of ants in finding the shortest route between cities and offer new insights into the potential of evolutionary and learning systems. The article argues that the future of software development will require a shift towards adaptable, evolving systems, and that artificial evolution may be necessary for software to constantly adapt and survive. However, this comes at the cost of control and precision. The article also touches on the potential of nanotechnology and the convergence of biotechnology and nanotechnology, but warns of the dangers of allowing artificial evolution to run rampant. Ultimately, the article suggests that giving up control can lead to the evolution of new possibilities and richness in the world.