POSTDARWINISM 
"It is totally wrong. It's wrong like infectious medicine was wrong before 
Pasteur. It's wrong like phrenology is wrong. Every major tenet of it is 
wrong," said the outspoken biologist Lynn Margulis about her latest target: the dogma of Darwinian evolution. 
Margulis has been right about what is wrong before. She shook up the world 
of microbiology in 1965 with her outrageous thesis of the symbiotic origin of nucleated cells. To the disbelief of traditionalists, she claimed that free-roaming bacteria cooperated to form cells. Then in 1974, Margulis again rattled the cage of biology by suggesting (jointly with James Lovelock) that atmospheric, geological, and biological processes on Earth are so interconnected that they act as a single living, self-regulating system-Gaia. Margulis was now denouncing the modern framework of the century-old theory of Darwinism, which holds that new species build up from an unbroken line of gradual, independent, random variations.
Margulis is not alone in challenging the stronghold of Darwinian theory, but 
few have been so blunt. Disagreeing with Darwin resembles creationism to the uninformed; therefore the stigma that any taint of creationism can bring to a scientific reputation, coupled with the intimidating genius of Darwin, have kept all but the boldest iconoclasts from doubting Darwinian theory in public.
What excites Margulis is the remarkable incompleteness of general 
Darwinian theory. Darwinism is wrong by what it omits and by what it incorrectly emphasizes. 
A number of microbiologists, geneticists, theoretical biologists, 
mathematicians, and computer scientists are saying there is more to life than Darwinism. They do not reject Darwin's contribution; they simply want to move beyond it. I call them the "postdarwinians." Neither Lynn Margulis nor any other postdarwinian denies the true ubiquity of natural selection in evolution. Their disagreement is with the very sweeping nature of the Darwinian argument, the fact that in the end it doesn't explain much, and the emerging evidence that Darwinism alone may not be sufficient to explain all we see. The vital questions the postdarwinians raise are: What are the limits to natural selection? What can't evolution make? And if blind natural selection has limits, what else is operating within or beyond evolution as we understand it?
According to the ordinary contemporary Darwinian biologist, there is nothing 
we see in nature that cannot be explained by the elemental process of natural selection. In academic jargon this stance is called selectionism, and the position is nearly universal among biologists working today. Because this stance is more extreme that what Darwin himself believed, it is sometimes called neodarwinism.
In the pursuit of artificial evolution, the limits (if any) to natural selection, or 
to evolution in general, take on practical importance. We'd like an artificial evolution that generates neverending diversity, but so far, that isn't so easy to do. We'd like to extend the dynamics of natural selection to very large systems with many levels of scale, but we don't know how far natural selection can be extended. We'd like an artificial evolution that we could control a bit more than we control organic evolution. Is that possible?
Questions like these have prompted the postdarwinians to reconsider 
alternative theories of evolution-many that existed before Darwin-that were eclipsed by the dominance of Darwinism. In a kind of intellectual survival of the fittest, contemporary biology places very little importance on these "inferior" beaten theories, so they survive only in marginal out-of- print books. But the ideas of these creative theories are suited to a new niche called artificial evolution and are cautiously being resurrected for examination.
The most stellar naturalists, geologists, and biologists of Darwin's time 
hesitated (despite Darwin's constant badgering) to accept his general theory in full when it was published in 1859. They accepted his transmutation theory-"descent with modification," or the gradual transmutation of new species from preexisting species. But they remained skeptical of his selectionist reasoning-that tiny random improvements were all there was to it-because they felt Darwin's explanation did not accurately fit the facts of nature, facts with which they were intimately familiar in a way that is rare today in this era of specialization and indoor laboratories. But since they could offer neither compelling disproof nor an alternative theory of equal quality, their forceful criticisms were buried in correspondence and scholarly disputes. 
Darwin didn't offer a concrete mechanism by which his proposed natural 
selection would take place, either. He was ignorant about genes, for starters. The first fifty years following the publication of Darwin's tour de force were ripe with supplemental theories of evolution, until Darwin's dominance was clinched by the discovery of genes and later DNA. Almost every radical evolutionary conviction circulating today has as its source some thinker in the years after Darwin but before acceptance of his theory as dogma.No one was more sensitive to the weaknesses of Darwinian theory than 
Darwin himself. As an example of trouble, Darwin volunteered the astounding multifaceted sophistication of the human eye. (Every critic of Darwin since has also used his example.) The exquisite design of interacting lens, iris, retina, etc., seems to defy the plausibility of Darwin's "slight, incremental" chance improvements. As Darwin wrote to his American friend Asa Gray, "About the weak points I agree. The eye to this day gives me a cold shudder." The difficulty Gray had was imagining how any portion of an unfinished eye, a retina without lens or vice versa, would be useful to its possessor. Since nature cannot hoard innovations ("Hey, this will come in handy in the Cretaceous!"), every stage in development must be immediately useful and viable. Breakthroughs have to work the first time. Even clever humans can't design in such a consistently demanding manner. Therefore nature appears superhuman in its ability to create.
Imagine, says Darwin, that we extrapolate the tiny microevolutionary 
changes we see in domesticated breeding-a pea with extra-large pods made larger, or a short horse bred shorter. Imagine if we extend those slight changes caused by selection over millions of years; we add up all the minute differences until we see major change. This is what makes coral reefs and armadillos out of bacteria, Darwin said-accumulated microchange. Darwin asks that we extend the logic of microchange to cover the grand scale of Earth and Time. 
The argument that natural selection can be extended to explain everything 
in life is a logical argument. But human imagination and human experience know that what is logical is not always what is so. To be logical is a necessary but insufficient reason to be true. Every swirl on a butterfly wing, every curve of leaf, every species of fish is explained by adaptive selection in neodarwinism. There seems to be absolutely nothing that cannot be explained in some way as an adaptive advantage. But, as Richard Lewontin, a renowned neodarwinist, says, "Natural selection explains nothing, because it explains everything."
Biologists cannot (or at least they have not) ruled out the role of other 
forces at work in nature producing similar effects in evolution. Therefore, until evolution is duplicated under controlled conditions, in the wild, or in a lab, neodarwinism remains a nice "just-so" story-more like history than science. Philosopher of science Karl Popper said bluntly that neodarwinism is not a scientific theory at all, since it cannot be falsified. "Neither Darwin, nor any Darwinian, has so far given an actual causal explanation of the adaptive evolution of any single organism or any single organ. All that has been shown-and this is very much [sic]-is that such an explanation might exist-that is to say, [these theories] are not logically impossible."
Life has a causality problem. Any coevolved organism seems to be self-
created, making causality onerous to pin down. Part of the search for more complete explanations of evolution is a search for a more complete logical understanding of spontaneous complexity and the rules by which entities may emerge from a web of parts. The quest for artificial evolution-so far 
done primarily in computer simulations-is very much tied into a new way of establishing proof in science. Previous to the advent of ubiquitous computers, science consisted of two facets: theory and experiment. A theory would shape an experiment, and then the experiment would confirm or disprove the theory.
But computers have birthed a third way of doing science: by simulation. A 
simulation is at once both a theory and an experiment. By running a computer model, such as Tom Ray's artificial evolution, we are trying out a theory and also running something real and accumulating falsifiable data. It may be that the dilemma of ascertaining causality in complex systems will be bypassed by these new methods of understanding, wherein one studies the real by modeling working surrogates.
Artificial evolution is at once a theory and test for natural evolution, and 
something original in itself.

Around the world, a few naturalists are conducting long-term observations 
of evolving populations of organisms in the wild: snails in Tahiti, fruitflies in 
Hawaii, finches in the Galapagos, and lake fish in Africa. Every year that these studies go on, there is a better chance that scientists can unequivocally demonstrate long-term evolution in action in the field. Shorter-term studies using bacteria, and recently flour beetles, show short-term evolution of organisms in the lab. So far, these experiments with populations of living creatures have matched the results expected from neodarwinian theory. The beaks of finches in the Galapagos really do thicken over time in response to drought-induced changes in their food supply, just as Darwin predicted.
These careful measurements prove that self-governing adaptation does 
spontaneously occur in nature. They also unequivocally demonstrate that noticeable change can emerge on its own by summing up the steady unnoticeable work of incremental deletions of the unfit. But the results do not show new levels of diversity, new kinds of creatures, or even new complexity emerging.
Despite a close watch, we have witnessed no new species emerge in the wild 
in recorded history. Also, most remarkably, we have seen no new animal species emerge in domestic breeding. That includes no new species of fruitflies in hundreds of millions of generations in fruitfly studies, where both soft and harsh pressures have been deliberately applied to the fly populations to induce speciation. And in computer life, where the term "species" does not yet have meaning, we see no cascading emergence of entirely new kinds of variety beyond an initial burst. In the wild, in breeding, and in artificial life, we see the emergence of variation. But by the absence of greater change, we also clearly see that the limits of variation appear to be narrowly bounded, and often bounded within species.
The standard explanation is that we are measuring a geological event in real 
time on a ridiculously infinitesimally small time span, so what do we expect? Life was bacterialike for billions of years before much happened. Patience, please! This is why Darwin and other biologists turned to the fossil record for proof of evolution. And although the fossil record indisputably exhibits Darwin's larger thesis-that over time modification of form is accumulated in descendants-the fossil record has not proved that this change is due solely or even primarily to natural selection.
No one has yet witnessed, in the fossil record, in real life, or in computer 
life, the exact transitional moments when natural selection pumps its complexity up to the next level. There is a suspicious barrier in the vicinity of species that either holds back this critical change or removes it from our sight.
Steven Jay Gould believes the exact transformation periods are removed 
from the sight of the fossil record by their incredibly instantaneous (evolutionarily speaking) mode. Whether his theory is correct or not, the evidence points to a natural limiting factor for extrapolated microchange that must somehow be overcome by evolution.
Synthetically reproduced protolife and artificial evolution in computers have 
already unearthed a growing body of nontrivial surprises. Yet artificial life suffers from the same malaise that afflicts its cousin, artificial intelligence. No artificial intelligence that I am aware of-be it autonomous robot, learning machine, or massive cognition program-has run more than 24 hours in succession. After a day, artificial intelligence stalls. Likewise, artificial life. Most runs of computational life fizzle out of novelty quickly. While the programs sometimes keep running, churning out minor variation, they ascend to no new levels of complexity or surprise after the first spurt (and that includes Tom Ray's world of Tierra). Perhaps given more time to run, they would. Yet, for whatever reason, computational life based on unadorned natural selection has not seen the miracle of open-ended evolution that its creators, and I, would love to see.
As the French evolutionist Pierre Grasse said, "Variation is one thing, 
evolution quite another; this cannot be emphasized strongly enough.... Mutations provide change, but not progress." So while natural selection may be responsible for microchange-a trend in variations-no one can say indisputably that it is responsible for macrochange-the open-ended creation of an unexpected novel form and progress toward increasing complexity.
Many of the promises for artificial evolution foretold in this book will still 
come about if artificial evolution is merely adaptive microchange. Spontaneously directed variation and selection is an incredibly powerful problem solver. Natural selection indeed works over the immediate short term. We can use it to find what we can't see and fill in what we can't imagine. The question comes down to whether random variation and selection are sufficient alone to produce ever increasing novelty over the very long term. And if "natural selection is not enough" then what else might be at work in wild evolution, and what may we import into artificial evolution that will generate self-organizing complexity?
Most critics of natural selection concede that Darwin got "survival of the 
fittest" right. Natural selection primarily means the destruction of the unfit. Once fitness is created, natural selection is peerless for winnowing out the 
duds.
But creating something useful is the bugaboo. What the Darwinian 
perspective neglects is a plausible explanation for the origin of fitness. Where does fitness come from before it is selected? In the popular rendition of neodarwinism today, the origin of fitness is credited to random variation. Random variation within chromosomes produces a random variation in the developmental growth of the organism, which every now and then bestows increased fitness on the whole organism. Fitness is generated randomly.
As experiments in wild and artificial evolution have shown, this simple 
process can steer coordinated change over the short time. But given that natural selection weeds out all the uncountable failures, and that there is uncountable time, can random mutation generate the unbroken series of needed winners for selection to choose from? Darwinian theory has the sizable burden of proving that the negative, braking power of selective demise, coupled with the blind chaotic power of randomness, can produce the persistent, creative, positive drive toward more complexity we see sustained in nature over billions of years.
Postdarwinism suggests that other forces are at work in evolution in the long 
run. These lawful mechanisms of change reorganize life into new fitnesses. These unseen dynamics extend the Library in which natural selection may operate. This deepened evolution need not be any more mystical than natural selection is. Think of each dynamic-symbiosis, directed mutation, saltationism, self-organization-as a mechanism that will foster evolutionary innovation over the long term in complement to Darwin's ruthless selection.

Symbiosis- the merger of two organisms into one-was once thought to 
occur only in isolated curiosities like lichens. After Lynn Margulis postulated 
bacterial symbiosis as a central event in the formation of the ancestral cell, biologists found symbiosis popping up frequently in microbial life. Since microbial life is (and has always been) the bulk of all life on Earth, and the primary Gaian workhorse, widespread microbial symbiosis makes symbiosis fundamental, both in the past and in the present. 
In contrast to the traditional picture of a population seething with tiny, 
random, incremental changes in their routine until they hit upon a stable new configuration, Margulis would have us consider the accidental merging of two working simple systems into one larger, more complex system. As illustration, a proven system for oxygen transport inherited by one cell line might be married to an existing system for air exchange in another cell line. Combined in symbiosis, the two might form a respiratory system unlikely to develop incrementally.
For a historical example, Margulis suggests her own studies on the symbiotic 
nature of nucleated cells. These emerging cells did not have to reinvent by trial and error over a billion years the clever processes of photosynthesis and respiration worked out by several types of bacteria. Instead, the membraned cells incorporated the bacteria and their informational assets as wholly owned subsidiaries working for the cells. They kidnapped the innovations. 
In some cases the genetic strands of two symbiotic partners may fuse. One 
proposed mechanism for the informational coordination needed for this kind of symbiosis is the known intercell gene transfer, which happens at a terrific rate among bacteria in the wild. The know-how of one system can be shuttled back and forth between separate species. A new bacteriology views all the bacteria of the world as a single genetically interacting superorganism that rapidly absorbs and broadcasts genetic innovations among its members. Interspecies gene transfer also occurs (at an unknown rate) among more complex species, including humans. Species of every sort are constantly swapping genes, often with naked viruses as the messengers. Viruses themselves are sometimes taken in symbiotically. A number of biologists believe that large chunks of human DNA were inserted viruses. A few even think that it's a loop-that many human disease viruses are escaped hunks of human DNA.
If true, the symbiotic nature of a cell provides a couple of lessons. First, it 
gives an example of a significant evolutionary change that lessens immediate benefits to the individual (since the individual disappears), in contradiction to classical Darwinian dogma. Second, it gives an example of evolutionary change that is not amassed by slight incremental differences, also in contradiction to Darwinian dogma. 
Routine symbiosis on a large scale could drive many of the complexities in 
nature that seem to require multiple simultaneous innovations. It would provide evolution with several other advantages; for instance, it would exploit the power of cooperation, rather than competition, exclusively. At the very least, cooperation nurtures a distinct set of niches and a type of diversity that competition cannot produce-such as lichens. In other words, it unleashes another dimension in evolution by enlarging its library of forms. Also, a small amount of symbiotic coordination at the right time could replace an eon of minor alterations. In one mutual relationship, evolution could jump past a million years of individual trial and error. 
Perhaps evolution could have discovered nucleated cells directly, without 
symbiosis, but it might have taken another billion years, or five, to do so. Lastly, symbiosis recombines widely diverse know-how separated in life's divergent genealogy. The picture to keep in mind is the diagrammatic tree of life, with ever dividing, ever spreading branches. Symbiotic alliances, on the other hand, bring divergent branches of the tree of life together again, to intersect. Evolution, charted with symbiosis included, may resemble a briar patch more than a tree-the Thicket of Life. If the Thicket of Life is sufficiently tangled, it may require a rethinking of our past and future.

Natural selection is a very grim natural reaper. Darwin made the bold 
claim that, at the very heart of evolution, many small deletions in bulk-many 
small wanton deaths-feeding on the throwaway optimism of minor variation, could, in a counterintuitive way, add up to something truly new and meaningful. In the drama of traditional selection theory, death plays the star role. It works single-mindedly by attrition. It is an editor that knows only one word: "No." Variation counterbalances the one-note song of death by giving birth to the new in cheap abundance. It too knows only one word: "Maybe." Variation cranks out disposable "maybes" in bulk, which are immediately mowed down by death. Bulk mediocrity is dismissed by wanton death. Occasionally, the theory goes, this duet produces a "Yes!"- a starfish, kidney cells, or Mozart. On the face of it, evolution by natural selection is still a startling hypothesis.
Death gives room for the new, it eliminates the ineffective. But to say that 
death causes wings to be formed, or eyeballs to work, is essentially wrong. Natural selection merely selects away the deformed wing, the unseeing eye. "Natural selection is the editor, not the author," says Lynn Margulis. What, then, authors innovation in flight and sight?
Evolution theory, from Darwin on, has had a dismal record in dealing with 
the origin of innovation. As his book title made clear, the question of the origin of species was the great riddle Darwin hoped to solve, not the origin of individuality. He asked, Where did new kinds of creatures come from? He did not ask, Where did variation among individuals come from?
Genetics, which began as a distinctly separate field of science, did pay 
attention to variation and origin of innovation. Early geneticists like Mendel and William Bateson (Gregory Bateson's father and the man who coined the term "genetics") struggled with explanations of how variations arose and were passed on to descending generations. Sir Francis Galton showed that for statistical purposes-the main bent of genetics until bioengineering came along-the propagation of variation within populations could be considered to have a random origin. 
Later, when the mechanism for heredity was discovered to be a code of four 
symbols strung on a long chain of molecules, the random flip of a symbol at a random point on the thread was easy to visualize as a cause of variation and easy to model in mathematics. These molecular flips are generally 
attributed to cosmic rays or thermodynamic noise. A monstrous mutation, once implying freakish severity, was newly seen as simply a flip, a mere deviation from the average variation. It was not long before all variations in an organism-from freckles to cleft palates-were treated as statistical degrees of mutational error. Variation thus became mutation and "mutation" became inseparably compounded into "random mutation." Today, the term random mutation seems redundant. What other kind of mutation could there possibly be?
In computer-intensive artificial evolution, mutations are manufactured by 
electronic, pseudo-random generators. But the exact nitty-gritty origins of mutations and variations in biology are still uncertain. We do know this: variation is emphatically not due to random mutation-at least not always; it has some measure of order. This is an old idea. As early as 1926, theorist Jan Christaan Smuts gave this genetic semi-order a name: internal selection.
A plausible scenario for internal selection allows cosmic rays to produce 
supposedly random errors in the DNA code, which are then corrected in cells by a known self-repair apparatus working in a discriminate (but unknown) fashion-correcting some and passing others. There is a high energetic cost to the correction of errors, a cost which must be weighed against the possible benefit of the variations. If the error occurred where it is probably opportune, it stays; if it occurs where it is bothersome, it is corrected. For a hypothetical example, the Krebs cycle is the basic fuel plant in every cell of your body. It has worked fine for hundreds of millions of years. There is simply too little to gain, and far too much to lose, in fiddling with it now. When a variation is detected in the code for the Krebs cycle, it is quickly extinguished. On the other hand, body size and body proportions might be worth tweaking; let's leave that area open to variation. If this were how it worked, differential variation would mean that some randomness is "more equal" than others. One fascinating consequence of this setup is that a mutation in the regulatory apparatus itself could have a large-scale effect far beyond a mutation in the strings it governs. I'll get back to that later.
Because genes interact and regulate each other so extensively, the genome 
forms a complex whole that resists change. Only certain areas can vary at all because most of the genes are so interdependent upon each other-almost grid-locked-that variation is not a choice. As evolutionist Ernst Mayr puts it, "Free variability is found only in a limited portion of the genotype." The power of this genetic holism can be seen in animal breeding. Breeders commonly encounter undesirable side effects triggered when unknown genes are activated in the process of selecting for one particular trait. However, when pressure for that one trait is let up, organisms in succeeding generations rapidly revert to the original type, much as if the genome has sprung back to its set point. Variation in real genes is quite different than we imagined. The evidence suggests that not only is it nonrandom and parochial, but it is difficult to come by at all.The impression one gets is of a highly flexible bureaucracy of genes 
managing the lives of other genes. Most astounding, the same gene bureaucracy is franchised throughout life, from fruitfly to whale. For example, a nearly identical homeobox self-control sequence (a master-switch gene which turns hunks of other genes on) is found in every vertebrate.
So prevailing is the logic of nonrandom variation that I was at first 
flabbergasted in my failure to find any biologists working today who still believe mutations to be truly random. Their nearly unanimous acknowledgment that mutations are "not truly random" means to them (as far as I can tell) that individual mutations may be less than random-ranging from near-random to plausible; but they still believe that statistically, over the long haul, a mass of mutations behaves randomly. "Oh, randomness is just an excuse for ignorance," quips Lynn Margulis.
This weak version of nonrandom mutation is hardly even an issue anymore, 
but a stronger version is more of a juicy heresy. It says that variations can be chosen in a deliberate way. Rather than have the gene bureaucracy merely edit random variations, have it produce variations by some agenda. Mutations would be created by the genome for specific purposes. Direct mutations could spur the blind process of natural selection out of its slump and propel it toward increasing complexity. In a sense, the organism would direct mutations of its own making in response to environmental factors. Ironically, there is more hard lab evidence at hand for the strong version of directed mutation than for the weak version.
According to the laws of neodarwinism, the environment, and only the 
environment, can select mutations; and the environment can never induce or direct mutations. In 1988 Harvard geneticist John Cairns and colleagues published evidence of environmentally induced mutations in the bacterium E. coli. Their claim was audacious: that under certain conditions the bacteria spontaneously crafted needed mutations in direct response to stresses in their environment. Cairns also had the gall to end his paper by suggesting that whatever process was responsible for the directed mutations "could, in effect, provide a mechanism for the inheritance of acquired characteristics"-a bald allusion to Darwin's rival-in-theory Jean-Baptiste Lamarck. 
Another molecular biologist, Barry Hall, published results which not only 
confirmed Cairns's claims but laid on the table startling additional evidence of direct mutation in nature. Hall found that his cultures of E. coli would produce needed mutations at a rate about 100 million times greater than would be statistically expected if they came by chance. Furthermore, when he dissected the genes of these mutated bacteria by sequencing them, he found mutations in no areas other than the one where there was selection pressure. This means that the successful bugs did not desperately throw off all kinds of mutations to find the one that works; they pinpointed the one alteration that fit the bill. Hall found some directed variations so complex they required the mutation of two genes simultaneously. He called that "the improbable stacked on top of the highly unlikely." These kinds of miraculous 
change are not the kosher fare of serial random accumulation that natural selection is supposed to run on. They have the smell of some design.
Both Hall and Cairns claim that they have carefully eliminated all other 
explanations for their results, and stick by their claim that the bacteria are directing their own mutations. However, until they can elucidate a mechanism for the way in which a stupid bacterium can become aware of which mutation is required, few other molecular geneticists are ready to give up strict Darwinism.

The difference between wild evolution in nature and synthetic evolution in 
computers is that software has no body. The kind of software you load with 
floppy disks is straightforward. If you alter the code (for the better, you hope), you execute the program and it fulfills its orders. There is nothing between what the code is and what it does, except the wiring of the machine it runs on. 
Biology is vastly different. If we take a hypothetical hunk of DNA as software 
code, and alter it, there is a consequential body that must be grown before the effects of the alteration can manifest itself. The development of an animal from fertilized egg, to egg producer may take years to complete; so the effect of that alteration can be judged differently depending on the stage of the growth. The same initial alteration of code can have one effect on the growing microscopic fetus and another effect on the sexually mature organism, if it survives that long. In every case, between the code alteration and the terminal effect (say, longer fingers), there is a chain of intermediate bodies governed by physics and chemistry-the enzymes, proteins, and tissues of life-which also must be indirectly altered by the software change. This vastly complicates mutational variation. Programming computers is no longer an adequate comparison.
You were once the size of a period. For a brief time you tumbled about as a 
multicellular sphere, much like pond algae. Currents swept and washed over you. Remember? Then you grew. You became sponge life, tubular, all gut. To eat was life. You grew a spinal cord to feel. You put on gill arches in preparation to breathe and burn food with intensity. You grew a tail to move, to steer, to decide. You were not a fish, but a human embryo role-playing a fish embryo. At every ghost-of-embryonic-animal you slipped into and out of, you replayed the surrender of possibilities needed for your destination. To evolve is to surrender choices. To become something new is to accumulate all the things you can no longer be.
While evolution is inventive, it is also conservative, making do with what is 
available. Biology rarely starts over. It begins with the past, which is distilled in the development of the organism. By the time an organism arrives at the end of its natal development, the millions of tradeoffs it has incurred forever block the chance to evolve in certain other directions. Evolution without a body is limitless. Evolution with a body, wrapped in development and prevented from retreating by its current success, is bound by endless 
constraints. But these constraints give it a place to stand. It may be that for artificial evolution to get anywhere, it too may need to wear a body.
When there are bodies in space, there is time. Mutations bloom in a body 
grown-in time's dimension. (That's something else artificial evolution has little of so far: developmental time.) To alter development early in the embryo is to fiddle with time. The earlier a mutation expresses itself in embryonic development, the more forcefully it will resound through the organism. This also loosens the constraints against failure, so the earlier the mutation is in development, the less likely it will be workable. In other words, the more complex an organism becomes, the less likely a very early change will survive.
Early developmental change has the advantage that a small mutation can 
affect a suite of things in a single blow. An appropriate early tweak can invoke or erase ten million years of evolution. The famous Antennapedia mutant of the Drosophila fruitfly is an example. This single-point mutation engages the leg-making apparatus of the embryo fly to build a leg where its antenna should be. The afflicted fly is born with a fake foot sticking out of its forehead-all triggered by one tiny alteration of code, which in turn triggers a suite of other genes. All kinds of monsters can be hatched this way. Which leads developmental biologists to wonder if the self-regulating genes of an organism might be able to tweak the genes governing these early suites into useful freaks, thus bypassing Darwin's incremental natural selection.
The curious thing about monsters, though, is that they seem to follow 
internal laws. While a two-headed calf may seem to us to be randomly defective, it isn't. When biologists studied freaks they found that the same type of monstrosities appeared in many species, and that their freakishness could even be categorized. For instance, a cyclops-a relatively common freak in mammals, including humans-born with a single centrally positioned eye, will almost always have its nostrils located above its eye. This is true regardless of the species in which it appears. Similarly, two-headedness is much more common than three-headedness. Since neither mutation is a variation that offers reproductive advantage, since few of these freaks survive, natural selection cannot be selecting one over the other. This mutant order must be internally generated.
In the early and mid-19th century a French father and son team, Etienne 
and Isidore Geoffroy Saint Hilaire, devised a classification scheme for natural monsters. Their taxonomy of mutants paralleled the Linnean system of natural species: every monstrosity was assigned a class, order, family, genus, and even species. Their work became the foundation of the modern science of monsters-teratology. Orderly form, the Hilaires implied, extended beyond natural selection.
Pere Alberch, at the Museum of Comparative Zoology at Harvard, is the 
modern spokesman for the importance of teratology in evolutionary biology. He interprets teratologies as overlooked blueprints for strong internal self-
organization within living organisms. He states, "Teratologies are a superb document of the potentiality of a given developmental process. In spite of strong negative selection, teratologies are not only generated in an organized and discrete manner but they also exhibit generalized transformational rules. These properties are not exclusive to teratology; rather they are general properties of all developmental systems." 
The orderly makeup of monsters-it is after all a well-formed foot which 
erupts out of a mutant Drosophila's forehead-speaks of a deep underlying internal force which helps guide the outward shape of organisms. This "internalist" approach differs from the orthodox "externalist" approach of most adaptationists who see ubiquitous natural selection as the major shaping force. As a dissenting internalist, Alberch writes: 
The internalist approach assumes, and this is a key assumption, that morphological diversity is generated by perturbations in parameter values (such as rates of diffusion, cell adhesion, etc....) while the structure of the interactions among the components remains constant. Given this assumption, even if the parameters of the system are randomly perturbed, by either genetic mutation, environmental variance or experimental manipulation during development, the system will generate a limited and discrete subset of phenotypes. Thus the realm of possible forms is a property of the internal structure of the system.
Thus we have two-headed freaks for perhaps the same reason we have bilateral arms; most likely neither is due to natural selection. Rather, internal structure, particularly the structure of the genome, and the accumulated morphogenesis of development, may be an equal or greater influence upon the variety of biological organizations possible.

The bodies that genes wear play an incredible role in the gene's 
evolution. When two chromosomes recombine in sex they do so not in 
nakedness but clothed inside a gigantic egg cell. The overstuffed egg has a great deal of say in how the genes are implemented. The yolky cell is chock-full of protein factors and hormonelike agents, and controlled by its own nonchromosomal DNA. The egg cell directs the chromosomal genes as they begin to differentiate, guiding them, orienting them, and orchestrating the construction of their baby. It is no exaggeration to say that the final organism reproduced is partly under the control of the egg cell, and out of the control of the genes. The state of the egg cell can be affected by stress, age, nutrition, etc. (There is one claim that Down's Syndrome, common in babies born to older women, happens because the two chromosomes responsible for the birth defect become physically entangled by lying so close to each other for so many years in the mother's egg cell.) Even before you are born-indeed from the moments of conception onward-forces outside of your genetic information form you genetically. Hereditary information does not exist independently of its embodiment. The origin of an organism's inheritable body, or morphogenesis, is due then to a partnership of nongenetic cell material and hereditary genes-body and genes. Evolution theory, and in particular evolutionary genetics, cannot understand evolution in full unless it remembers the complicated morphology of life. Artificial evolution will only take off when it is embodied.
Each biological egg cell, like most nucleated cells, carries several libraries of 
DNA information outside of the chromosomes. Most disturbing to standard theory, the egg cell may be constantly swapping bits of code within itself, between the files of its in-house DNA and the files of inherited chromosomal DNA. If information in the house DNA could be shaped by the experience of the egg cell, then transmitted to the chromosomal DNA, it would transgress the stern Central Dogma, which states that in biology information can only flow from the genes to the cellular body-not vice versa. That is, there is no direct feedback from the body (phenotype) to the gene (genotype). We should be suspicious of any rule such as the Central Dogma, Darwinian critic Arthur Koestler pointed out, because "it would be the only example found in nature of a biological process devoid of feedback." 
There are two lessons in morphogenesis for creators of artificial evolution. 
The first is that changes in an adult organism are triggered in embryos indirectly through the environment of the mother's egg, as well as directly 
by genealogy. There is plenty of room in this process for unconventional information flow from the cell (the mother's cell) to the genes via control factors and intracellular DNA swap. As German morphologist Rupert Riedl puts it, "Neolamarckism postulates that there is direct feedback. Neodarwinism postulates that there is no feedback. Both are mistaken. Truth lies in the middle. There is feedback but it is not direct." One major route for indirect feedback to the genes is the very early stages of embryonic growth, the hours of incarnation when the genes become flesh.
During these hours, the embryo is an amplifier. Hence the second lesson: 
Small changes can be magnified as development unfolds. In this way, morphogenesis skips Darwinian gradualism. This point was made by the Berkeley geneticist Richard Goldschmidt, whose ideas on nongradual evolution were derided and scorned throughout his life. His major work, The Material Basis of Evolution (1940), was dismissed as near-crackpot until Steven Jay Gould began a campaign to resurrect his ideas in the 1970s. Goldschmidt's title mirrors a theme of mine here: that evolution is an intermingling of material and information, and that genetic logic cannot be divorced from the laws of material form in which it dwells. (An extrapolation of this idea would be that artificial evolution will run slightly differently from natural evolution as long as it is embedded on a different substrate.)
Goldschmidt spent a unrewarded lifetime showing that extrapolating the 
gradual transitions of microevolution (red rose to yellow rose) could not explain macroevolution (worm to snake). Instead, he postulated from his work on developing insects that evolution proceeded by jumps. A small change made early in development would lead to a large change-a monster-at the adult stage. Most radically altered forms would abort, but once in a while, large change would cohere and a hopeful monster would be born. The hopeful monster would have a full wing, say, instead of the half-winged intermediate form Darwinian theory demanded. Organisms could arrive fully formed in niches that a series of partially formed transitional species would never get to. The appearance of hopeful monsters would also explain the real absence of transitional forms in fossil lineages.
Goldschmidt made the intriguing claim that his hopeful monsters could most 
easily be generated by small shifts in developmental timing. He found "rate genes" that controlled the timing of local growth and differentiation processes. For instance, a tweak in the gene controlling the rates of pigmentation would produce caterpillars of wildly different color patterns. As his champion Gould writes, "Small changes early in embryology accumulate through growth to yield profound differences among adults....Indeed, if we do not invoke discontinuous change by small alterations in rates of development, I do not see how most major evolutionary transitions can be accomplished at all."
continue...   
 
Out of Control
There is a grave and unmistakable lack of intermediates in the fossil 
record. The fact that creationists gloat over it should not tempt others to 
ignore it. The "fossil gaps" were a hole in Darwin's theory that he promised would go away in the future, when more areas of Earth were searched by professional evolutionists. The gaps did not go away in the least. Once a "trade secret" of paleontologists, the gaps are now acknowledged by every leading authority on evolution. Here are two: "The known fossil record fails to document a single example of phyletic [gradual] evolution accomplishing a major morphologic transition and hence offers no evidence that the gradualistic model can be valid," says Stephen Stanley, evolutionary paleontologist. And here's Steven Jay Gould again, speaking as the expert paleontologist he is:
All paleontologists know that the fossil record contains precious little in the 
way of intermediate forms; transitions between major groups are characteristically abrupt....The history of most fossil species includes two features particularly inconsistent with gradualism:
1. Stasis. Most species exhibit no directional change during their tenure on Earth. They appear in the fossil record looking much the same way as when they disappear....
2. Sudden appearance. In any local area, a species does not 
arise gradually by the steady transformation of its ancestors; it appears all at once and "fully formed." 
In the eyes of science historians, Darwin's most consequential claim was that the discontinuous face of life as a whole was an illusion. The separateness of species, the "immutable essence" intrinsic to each type of animal or plant-a principle which the ancient philosophers had taught forever-was, he claimed, false. The Bible spoke of creatures "each made in their kind," and most biologists of the day, including the young Darwin, thought species kept to their breed in an idealized way. It was the type that mattered, while individuals conformed more or less to the type. The enlightened Darwin announced, however, that (1) every individual differed significantly; (2) all life was dynamically plastic, infinitely malleable between individuals, so (3) individuals arranged in populations were all that mattered. The barriers erected by species were porous and illusory. By shifting the discontinuity from species to every individual, Darwin vaporized 
it. Life was one evenly distributed being.
But intriguing suspicions now accumulating in the study of complex systems, 
particularly complex systems that adapt, learn, and evolve, suggest Darwin was wrong in his most revolutionary premise. Life is largely clumped into parcels and only mildly plastic. Species either persist or die. They transmute into something else under only the most mysterious and uncertain conditions. By and large, complex things fall into categories and the categories persist. Stasis of the category is the norm: the typical lifespan for a species is between one and ten million years.
Things that resemble organisms-economic firms, thoughts in the brain, 
ecological communities, nation-states-also naturally differentiate into persistent clumps. Human institution clumps-churches, departments, companies-find it easier to grow than to evolve. Required to adapt too far from their origins, most institutions will die.
"Organic" entities are not infinitely malleable because complex systems 
cannot easily be gradually modified in a sequence of functional intermediates. A complex system (such as a zebra or a company) is severely limited in the directions and ways it can evolve, because it is a hierarchy composed entirely of subentities, which are also limited in their room for adaptation because they are composed of sub-subentities, and so on down the tower.
It should be no surprise, then, to find that evolution works in quantum 
steps. The given constituents of an organism can collectively make this or that, but not everything in between this and that. The hierarchical nature of the whole prevents it from reaching all the possible states it might theoretically hit. At the same time, the hierarchical arrangement of the whole gives it power to make some large-scale shifts. So a record of this organism would show it leaping from this to that. In biology, this is called saltationism (from the Latin saltare, to jump) and it is totally out of favor among professional biologists. Mild saltationism was rejuvenated with interest in Goldschmidt's genetic hopeful monsters, but a complex saltationism that would significantly leap over transitional forms is pure heresy at the moment. Yet the interdependent coadaptations that constitute a complex being must produce quantum evolution. Artificial evolution has not yet produced an "organism" complex enough to contain hierarchical depth, and so we don't know yet in what way saltationism might appear in synthetic worlds.

The morphogenic development of an egg cell into a living creature is full 
of inherited baggage that constrains the possible variety of its potential 
descendants. Overall, materials that constitute bodies impose physical constraints that limit what kind of animals can be formed. There'll be no elephants with legs as thin as an ant's. Genetic constraints-the physical nature of genes-likewise narrow what kind of animals can be formed. Each hunk of genetic information is a protein that must physically move to communicate. As general as DNA is, some messages will be difficult or impossible to code in a complex body because of the physical constraints of the genes. 
Because genes have their own dynamics independent of the organism, they 
dictate what can be birthed from them. Inside the genome, genes are interconnected to the point that the gene can become grid-locked-A is waiting on B, B is waiting on C, and C is waiting on A. This internal linkage raises a conservative force within the genome that pushes on itself to keep the genome unchanged-regardless of what body it makes. Like a complex system, the genetic circuitry tends to resist perturbations by restricting allowable variations. The genome seeks to persist as a cohesive unity.
When artificial or natural selection moves a genotype (say, of a pigeon) out 
of one stability toward a preferred character (say, white color), the interlinked character of the genome kicks in to produce multiple side effects (say, nearsightedness). Darwin, pigeon breeder that he was, noticed this and called it "the mysterious law of correlation of growth." Ernst Mayr, the grand old man of neodarwinism, states, "I do not know of a single intensive selection [breeding] experiment during the past 50 years during which some such undesirable side effects have not appeared." The single-point mutations that traditional population genetics are built upon are rare. Genes usually work in complexes, and are themselves a complex, adaptive system. The genes harbor their own wisdom and their own inertia. This is why even monsters follow rules.
The genome must stray far enough from its usual arrangement before it can 
create a substantially different outward form. When the genome is "pulled" by competitive pressures outside its usual orbit, it must materially rearrange its patterns of linkage in order to remain stable. In cybernetic terms, it must settle into a different basin of attraction, one that has its own unity and cohesion, its own homeostasis.
Before an organism takes a stand in the world, before it directly meets the 
natural selection of competition and survival, it has already been subjected to two degrees of internal selection-first by the internal constraints of the genome, and secondly by the laws of bodily form. There is yet a third degree of internal selection that affects an organism before it can truly deal with natural selection. A change accepted by the genome, and then accepted by the bodily form, must then be accepted by the population at large. A single individual with a brilliant mutation will bury that innovation when it dies unless those genes are spread throughout the population. Populations (or demes) exhibit their own cohesive drive toward unity, contributing to an emergent behavior of the whole, as if they were one large, homeostatically balanced system-the population as an individual.
That anything novel ever surmounts these hurdles to evolve is astounding. 
Mayr writes in Toward a New Philosophy of Biology: "The most difficult feat of evolution is to break out of the straight-jacket of this cohesion. This is the reason why only so relatively few new structural types have arisen in the last 500 million years, and this may well also be the reason why 99.999 percent of all evolutionary lines have become extinct. They did so because the cohesion prevented them from responding quickly to sudden new demands by the environment." Stasis, long a major riddle in a constantly changing, coevolving world, now has a alibi.
I delve into these matters deeply because the constraints on biological 
evolution are the hope of artificial evolution. Every negative constraint within the kinetics of evolution may be viewed in the positive. The power of constraints that retain the old also assemble the new. The delicate gravity that holds organisms in their places, preventing them from casually drifting off to other forms, is the same gravity that pulls in organisms to certain forms in the first place. The self-reinforcing aspect of a gene's internal genetic selection-which makes leaving its stability so difficult-acts as a valley drawing in random arrangements until they rest in that basin of the possible. Over millions of years, the multiple stabilities of genome and body keep a species centered, overriding the action of natural selection. When a species does break away by a radical jump, the same cohesion-again beyond influence of natural selection-lures it into a new homeostasis. It seems odd at first, but constraints create.
Therefore what is said about extinctions-that constraints caused them-may 
be equally true about origins. The emergent cohesion at various levels of biology, and not natural selection per se, may well be the reason why 99.999 percent of life forms originated. The role of constraints to assemble life-what some call self-organization-is unmeasured, but probably immense.
continue...   
 
Out of Control
A famous image from Darwin's Origin of Species, written over a century 
before the dawn of the first computer, precisely embodies the task of 
evolution in computerese. Evolution, Darwin said, "is daily and hourly scrutinizing, throughout the world, every variation, even the slightest; rejecting that which is bad, preserving and adding up all that is good; silently and insensibly working...." This is the algorithmic search through the Library of forms. Is the Library of possible biological life forms a vast space with only a few sparse coherent works, or is it filled with many of them? How likely is it that a random evolutionary step will land on a possibility with real life? How closely bunched are functioning organisms in the space of possibilities? How isolated are viable lineages from each other? 
If the density of possible life forms is sufficiently crowded with feasible 
beings, then the space of possibilities can be more easily searched by the chance-driven walk of natural selection. A space thick with prospects and searchable by randomness provides uncountable paths for evolution to follow through time. On the other hand, if functioning life forms are sparse and isolated from each other, natural selection alone will probably be unable to reach new forms of life. The distribution of functional units in life may be so scant that most of the space of possible organisms lies empty of workable cases. In this vast space of failure, viable life forms may be found lumped together in patches, or conglomerated onto a few crooked paths through the space.
If the space of functioning organisms is at all sparse, then it is clear that in 
order to proceed from one patch of viable creatures to the next, evolution needs something to guide it through empty wastelands. A trial-and-error walk, such as that which underlies natural selection, can only get you nowhere fast.
We know virtually nothing of the real distribution of life in the Library of 
realities. It may be so sparse and unpregnant with possibilities that there is only one living path through it-the path we are currently on. Or there might be broad highways in the Library that channel a number of paths into a few bottlenecks that all beings must cross-say, the resonant attractor of four legs, a tubular gut, five-digit hands. Or there may be a submerged bias in life's substrate, so that no matter where you start you eventually arrive on the shores of bilateral symmetry, segmented limbs, and intelligence of one kind or another. We just don't know. But with artificial evolution at work, we 
could know.
These fruitful questions about the constitutional laws of evolution are being 
asked, not in biological terms, but in the language of a new science, the science of complexity. Biologists find it most grating that the impetus for this postdarwinian convergence comes chiefly from mathematicians, physicists, computer scientists, and whole systems theorists-people who couldn't tell the difference between Cantharellus cibarius and Amanita muscaria (one of them a deadly mushroom) if their lives depended on it. Naturalists have had nothing but scorn for those so willing to simplify nature's complexity into computer models, and to disregard the conclusions of that most awesome observer of nature, Charles Darwin.
Of Darwin's insights, Darwin himself reminded readers in his update to the 
third edition of Origin of Species: 
As my conclusions have lately been much misrepresented, and it has been stated that I attribute the modification of species exclusively to natural selection, I may be permitted to remark that in the first edition of this work, and subsequently, I place in a most conspicuous position-namely at the close of the Introduction-the following words: "I am convinced that natural selection has been the main, but not the exclusive means of modification." This has been of no avail. Great is the power of steady misrepresentation. 
Neodarwinism presented a wonderful story of evolution through natural selection, a just-so story whose logic was impossible to argue with: since natural selection could logically create all things, all things were created via natural selection. As long as the argument was over the history of our one life on Earth, one had to settle for this broad interpretation unless inarguable evidence would come along to prove otherwise.
It has not yet come. The clues I present here of symbiosis, directed 
mutation, saltationism, and self-organization, are far from conclusive. But they are of a pattern: that evolution has multiple components in addition to natural selection. And furthermore, these bits and questions are being stirred up by a bold and daring vision: to synthesize evolution outside of biology.
The moment we tried to transfer the dynamics of evolution out of history 
and into a manufactured medium, the inner nature of evolution was exposed to scrutiny. Evolution pressed into artificial evolution within computers has passed the first neodarwinist test. It demonstrates spontaneous self-selection as a means of adaptation, and as a means of generating some initial novelty.continue... 
  
 
Out of Control
But if artificial evolution is to become a powerhouse of creativity on par 
with natural evolution, we must either grant it immense time periods we 
don't have, or enhance it with further creative aspects of natural evolution, if they are indeed there. At the very least, messing with artificial evolution will illuminate the true character of historical evolution of life on Earth in a way that neither current observations nor past fossils can hope to do.
I do not find it alarming at all that evolution theory may be taken over by 
postdarwinians without biology degrees. The great lesson which artificial evolution has already imparted is that evolution is not a biological process. It is a technological, mathematical, informational, and biological process rolled into one. It could almost be said it is a law of physics, a principle that reigns over all created multitudes, whether they have genes or not.
The least-appreciated aspect of Darwin's natural selection is how 
unavoidable it is. The conditions for natural selection are very specific, but if these conditions are met, natural selection is inevitable! 
Natural selection can only occur in populations and swarms of things. It's a 
phenomenon of mobs distributed in space and time. The process must involve a population having (1) variation among individuals in some trait, (2) where that trait makes some difference in fertility, fecundity, or survival ability, and (3) where that trait is transmitted in some fashion from parents to their offspring. If those conditions exist, natural selection will happen as inevitably as seven follows six, or heads and tails split. As evolution theorist John Endler says, "Natural selection probably should not be called a biological law. It proceeds not for biological reasons, but from the laws of probability."
But natural selection is not evolution, nor can evolution be equated with 
natural selection. In the same way, arithmetic is not mathematics nor can mathematics be equated with arithmetic. One can claim that all of mathematics is just addition compounded. Subtraction is addition in reverse, multiplication addition in sequence, and all complex functions built upon those mere extrapolation of addition. This is somewhat the same argument of the neodarwinists: all evolution is the extrapolation of natural selection compounded. While there is a grain of truth in this perspective, it shuts off understanding and appreciation of more complex things. While multiplication is precisely a form of serial additions, wholly new powers emerge from this 
shortcut that would not be understood if multiplication was only thought of as addition repeated. Dwelling on addition will not get you to E=mc2.
I believe there is a mathematics of life. Natural selection may be its additive 
function. But to fully explain the origin of life, the remarkable trend toward complexity, and the invention of intelligence requires more than addition. It needs a rich mathematics of complex functions built upon each other; it needs deeper evolution. Natural selection alone is not enough, not by miles. It must be alloyed with more creative, generative processes to accomplish much. It must have more to naturally select from. 
What the postdarwinians have shown is that there is no such thing as 
monolithic evolution run by one-dimensional natural selection. It would be more fitting to say that evolution is plural and deep. Deep evolution is an aggregate of many kinds of evolutions; it is a multifaced god, a creator with many arms, working by many methods, of which natural selection of variation is perhaps the most universal factor. An uncharted variety of evolutions make up deep evolution, just as our minds comprise a society of dimwitted agents and a variety of types of thinking. Various evolutions proceed at different scales, at different tempos, in different styles. Furthermore, this blend of evolutions changes over time. Certain types of evolution were important in early protolife; some are more emphasized now, four billion years later. One variety (natural selection) will be ubiquitous throughout the plurality, while others will be rare and specialized in their roles. Deep, pluralistic evolution, like intelligence, is an emergent property of a community of dynamics.
As we construct an artificial evolution to breed machines and software, we 
will also need to allow for this heterogenous character of evolution. In a functioning artificial evolution capable of open-ended, sustainable creativity, I would expect to see the following dynamics (which I believe reside to some degree in biological evolution but which may appear artificially in a stronger form than we find in biology):
     Symbiosis-Easy informational swaps that permit convergence of distinct lines
     Directed Mutations-Nonrandom mutation and crossover mechanisms with direct communication from the environment
     Saltationism-Clustering of functions, hierarchical levels of control, modularization of components, and adaptive processes that modify a cluster all at once
     Self-organization-Development biased toward certain forms (like four wheels), which become pervasive standardsArtificial evolution will not be able to make everything. There will be many 
things that we can imagine in full detail-and that by the laws of both physics and logic should work-that synthetic evolution will not be able to reach because of its constraints. 
In an unconscious way the computer-toting postdarwinians are asking the 
question: What are the limits of evolution? What can evolution not do? The limits to organic evolution may not be ultimate, but its biases and inabilities may hold answers to evolution's creative talents. Where are the vacant black holes in the landscape of possible creatures? I can only echo Alberch, the monster guy, who said, "I am more concerned about the empty spaces, about the morphologies that, although conceivable, are not realized." To paraphrase Lewontin, "An evolution that cannot make all things, explains some things."