GOD GAMES 
Populous II is a state-of-the-art computer god game. You play god. A son 
of Zeus to be exact. Through the portal of the computer screen you spy 
down upon a patch of Earth where the tiny figures of men scurry about farming, building, and wandering around. With a shimmering blue hand (the hand of god) you can reach down and touch the land, transforming it. You can either gradually level mountains or gradually build up valleys. In both cases, you try to create flat farmland for people. Except for the power to deliver a spectrum of disasters such as earthquakes, tidal waves, and tornadoes, your direct influence over the people of your world is limited to this geological hand.
Good farmland makes happy people. You can see them prosper and bustle 
about. They build farmhouses first; then as their numbers increase, they build red-tile roofed town houses, and if things continue to bode well, eventually they construct complex walled cities, whitewashed and gleaming in the Mediterranean sun. The more the little beings prosper, the more they worship you, and the more manna (power) you, the god, accumulate. 
Here's your problem, though. Elsewhere in the greater landscape other sons 
of Zeus are contesting for immortality. These gods can be played by other humans, or by the game's own AI agent. The other gods will rain the seven plagues on your populace, wiping out your base of support and worship. They can send a crashing blue tidal wave which not only drowns your citizenry but submerges their farmland, endangering your own divine existence. No people, no worship, no god.
Of course, you can do the same-if you have enough manna in store. Using 
your destructive powers consumes manna by the barrelful. Besides, there are other ways to defeat your enemies and gain manna without sending a zigzagging crack through an area, a crack which swallows groaning people as they fall in. You can devise Pan figures that roam the countryside luring newcomers to your religion with magic flutes. Or you can erect a "Papal Magnet," a granite ankh monument which acts as a shrine, attracting worshipers and pilgrims.
Meanwhile your own citizens are dodging fire storms from your scheming 
half-brothers. And after those minor-league gods are through trashing one of your countries, you've got to decide whether to rebuild it or go after their populations with your arsenal. You could use a tornado which sucks up 
houses and people alike and visibly tosses them across the land. Or a biblical column of fire which scorches the earth into barrenness (until a god restores it by sowing healing wildflowers). Or, you can send burning flows of lava from a well-placed volcano.
I got an expert tour of this world from a metagod's point of view on a visit to 
the office of Electronic Arts, the game's publisher, where I was taken through the paces of god powers. Jeff Haas is one of the developers of the game. You could call Haas a supergod who created the other gods. He pointed to a gathering dark mass of clouds over one village that suddenly erupted into a shower of lightning. The bolts shimmied down to Earth. When a white bolt struck a person, the figure fried to a blackened crisp. Haas chortled in delight at the exquisitely rendered graphic but caught my raised eyebrow. "Yes," he admitted sheepishly, "the point of the game is destruction-total slash and burn."
"There are a few positive things you can do as a god," Haas volunteered, 
"but not many. Making trees is one of them. Trees always make people happy. And you can bless the land with wildflowers. But mostly it's destroy or be destroyed." Aristotle might have understood. In his day, gods were entities to be feared. God as a buddy, or even an ally, is hopelessly modern. You kept out of the gods' way, appeased them when needed, and prayed that your god would vanquish the other gods. The world was dangerous and capricious.
"Let me put it this way," Haas says, "you definitely do not want to be one of 
the people in this world." You bet. It's godhood for me.

To win Populous, you've got to think like a god. You cannot live many 
small individual lives and succeed. Nor can you manipulate every individual 
simultaneously and hope to remain sane. Control must be surrendered to a populous mob. Individuals of Populous land, who are no more than a few bits of code, have a certain amount of autonomy and anonymity. Their pandemonium must be harnessed collectively in an intelligent way. That's your job. 
As god, you have only indirect control. You can offer incentives, play with 
global events, make calculated tradeoffs, and hope that you get the mix right so that your underlings follow you. Cause and effect in this game is coevolutionarily fuzzy; changing one thing always changes many things, often in the direction you wanted least. All management is done laterally.
Software stores sell other god games: Railroad Tycoon, A-Train, Utopia, 
Moonbase. They all enable you, the neo-god, to entice citizens to create a self-sustaining empire. In the game Power Monger you are one of four godlike kings hoping to rule supreme over a large region of a planet. The population below, which numbers in the hundreds, is not faceless. Each citizen has a name, an occupation, and a biography. As deity, your job is to urge the citizenry to explore the land, mine ore, make plows, or hammer them into swords. All you can do is adjust the society's parameters and then set the beings loose. It's hard for a god to guess what will emerge. If your folks manage to rule over the most land, you win.
In the brief annals of classic god games, the game of Civilization ranks 
pretty high. Here the goal is to steer your bottom-up population through the evolution of culture. You can't tell them how to build a car, but you can set them up so that they can make the "discoveries" needed to build one. If they invent a wheel, then they can make chariots. If they acquire masonry skills, then they can make arithmetic. Electricity needs metallurgy and magnetism; corporations first require banking skills. 
This is a new way of steering. Pushing too hard can backfire. The denizens in 
Civilization might revolt at any time, and occasionally they do. All the while you are racing against other cultures being tweaked by your opponent. Lopsided contests are quite common. I once heard an avid Civilization player boast that he overran the other society with stealth bombers while they were still working on chariots.
It's only just a game, but Populous embodies the subtle shift in our 
interactions with all computers and machines. Artifacts no longer have to be inert homogeneous lumps. They can be liquid, adaptable, slippery webs. These collectivist machines run on myriad tiny agents interacting in ways we can't fathom, generating results we can only indirectly control. Getting a favorable end result is a challenge in coordination. It feels like herding sheep, managing an orchard, or raising kids.
In the development of computers, games come first, work later. Kids who 
become comfortable relating to machines as if they behave organically, later expect the same from machines at work when they are older. MIT psychologist Sherry Turkle describes the readiness of children to perceive complicated devices as organic as an affinity for a "second self"-a projection of themselves onto their machines. Toy worlds certainly encourage that personification.
SimEarth, yet another god game, bills itself, somewhat tongue in cheek, as 
"the ultimate experience in planet management." An acquaintance of mine told a story of making a long car trip with three 10-12-year-old boys in the back seat, the trio equipped with a laptop computer running SimEarth. He drove while eavesdropping on the boys' conversation. He gathered that the boys had decided their goal was to evolve intelligent snakes. The kids:
"Do you think we can start the reptiles now?" 
"Oh shoot. The mammals are taking over." 
"We better add more sunlight." "How can we make the snakes smarter?" 
SimEarth has no narrative or fixed goals-a nonstarter for many adults. Kids, 
on the other hand, fall into the game without hesitation or instruction. "We are as gods, and might as well get good at it," declared Stewart Brand in 1968, who had personal computers (a term he later coined) and other vivisystems in mind when he said it.
Stripped of all secondary motives, all addictions are one: to make a world of 
our own. I can't imagine anything more addictive then being a god. A hundred years from now nothing will keep us away from artificial cosmos cartridges we can purchase and pop it into a world machine to watch creatures come alive and interact on their own accord. Godhood is irresistible. The hemorrhaging expense of yet another hero will not keep us away. World-makers could charge us anything they want for a daily fix of a few hours immersed in the interactive saga of our characters' lives, and to keep our world going we will pay it. Organized crime will make billions of 
dollars peddling crude artificial calamities-first class hurricanes or high priced tornadoes-to addicts compelled to buy. Over time, god-customers will evolve fairly sturdy and endearing populations, which they will be eager to test with yet another fully rendered natural disaster. For the poor there will surely be underground exchanges of generic mutant beings and pilfered scenarios. The headlong high of substituting for Jehovah, and the genuine, overwhelming, sheer love for one's private world, will suck in any and all who near it. 
Because simulated worlds behave-in a tiny but measurable way-similarly to 
worlds of living organisms, the ones that survive will grow in complexity and value. The organic ambiance of distributed, parallel world-games is not mere anthropomorphism, despite the second self projected upon them. 
SimEarth was meant to model Lovelock's and Margulis's Gaia hypothesis, 
which it succeeded in doing to a remarkable degree. Fairly serious changes in the simulated Earth's atmosphere and geology are compensated by convoluted feedback loops in the system itself. For instance, overheating the planet increases biomass production, which reduces CO2 levels, which cools the planet. 
Scientists debate whether the evidence of self-correcting cohesion seen in 
the Earth's global geochemistry qualify Earth as a large organism (Gaia), or merely a large vivisystem. Applying the same test to SimEarth we get a more certain answer: SimEarth, the game, is not an organism. But it is a step in the direction of the organic. By playing SimEarth and other god games we can get a feel of what it will be like to parry with autonomous vivisystems. 
In SimEarth, a mind-boggling web of factors impinge on each other, making 
it impossible to sort out what does what. Players sometimes complain that SimEarth appears to run without regard to human control. It's as if the game has its own agenda and you are just watching.
Johnny Wilson, a gaming expert and author of a SimEarth handbook, says 
that the only way to derail Gaia (SimEarth) is to launch a cataclysmic alteration such as titling the axis of the Earth to horizontal. He says there is an "envelope" of limits within which the SimEarth system will always bounce back; one must bump the system beyond that envelope to crash it. As long as SimEarth runs inside the envelope, it follows its own beat; outside of it, it follows no beat. As a comparison, Wilson points out that SimCity, SimEarth's older sister, "is much more satisfying as a game, because you get more instant and clear feedback on changes, and because you feel like you are more in control."
Unlike SimEarth, SimCity is the paramount example of an underling- driven 
god game. This award-winning simulation of a city is so convincing that professional urban planners use it to demonstrate the dynamics of real 
cities, which are also driven by underlings. SimCity succeeds, I believe, because it is based on the swarm, the same foundation that all vivisystems are based on: a collective of richly linked, autonomous, localized agents working in parallel. In SimCity a working city bubbles up from a swarm of hundreds of ignorant Sims (or Simpletons) doing their simple-minded tasks. 
SimCity obeys the usual tail-swallowing logic of god games. Sims won't take 
up residence in your city unless there are factories, but factories generate pollution which drives away residents. Roads help commuters but also raise taxes, which drive down your ratings as a mayor, which you need to survive politically. The maze of interrelated factors required to construct a sustainable SimCity can unfold along the lines of the following fairly typical account from a heavy SimCity-using friend of mine: "In one city which I built up over many Sim-years I had a 93 percent approval in the public opinion polls. Things were going great! I had a nice balance of tax-producing commerce and citizen-retaining beauty. To lessen pollution in my great metropolis I ordered a nuclear power plant built. Unfortunately I inadvertently placed it in my airport's flight path. One day a plane crashed into the generators, causing a meltdown. This set fire to the town. But since I hadn't built enough fire stations in the vicinity (way too costly), the fires spread and eventually burnt down the whole city. I'm rebuilding now, differently."
Will Wright, the author of SimCity and coauthor of SimEarth, is thirtyish, bookish, and certainly one of the most innovative programmers working today. Because Sim games are so hard to control, he likes to call them Software Toys. You diddle with them, explore, try out fantasies, and learn. You don't win, any more than you might win at gardening. Wright sees his robust simulation toys as the initial baby steps toward a full march of "adaptive technologies." These technologies are not designed, improved upon, or adjusted by the creator; rather, they-on their own accord-adapt, learn, and evolve. It shifts a bit of power from the user to the used.
The origins of SimCity trace Will's own path to this vision. In 1985 Will wrote 
what he calls "a really, and I mean really, stupid video game" entitled Raid on Bungling Bay. It was a typical shoot-'em-up starring a helicopter that bombed everything in sight. 
"To create this game I had to draw all these islands that the helicopter 
would go bomb," recalls Will. Normally the artist/author modeled the complete fantasy in minute pixelated detail, but Will got bored. "Instead," Will says, "I wrote a separate program, a little utility, that would let me go around and build these islands real quick. I also wrote some code that could automatically put roads on the islands." 
By engaging his land-making or road-making module the program would-on 
its own!-fill in land or roads in the simulated world. Will remembers, "Eventually I finished the shoot-'em-up game part, but for some reason I 
kept going back to the darn thing and making the building utilities more and more fancy. I wanted to automate the road function. I made it so that when you added each connecting piece of island, the road parts on them would connect up automatically to form a continuous road. Then I wanted to put down buildings automatically, so I built a little menu choice for buildings. 
"I started asking myself, why am I doing this since the game is finished? The 
answer was that I found that I had a lot more fun building the islands than I had destroying them. Pretty soon I realized that I was fascinated by bringing a city to life. At first I just wanted to do a traffic simulation. But then I realized that traffic didn't make a lot of sense unless you had places where the people drove to...and that led layer upon layer to a whole city; SimCity."
A player building a SimCity recapitulates Will Wright's sequence in inventing 
it. First, he makes the lower geographical foundation of land and water which support the road traffic and telephone infrastructure which support residential homes which support the Sims which support the mayor. 
To get a feel for the dynamics of a city, Wright studied a simulation of an 
average city done in the 1960s at MIT by Jay Forrester. Forrester summarized city life into quantitative relations rendered as mathematical equations. They were almost rules of thumb: it takes so many residents to support one firefighter; or, you need so many parking spaces for each car. Forrester published his findings as Urban Dynamics, a book which influenced many aspiring computer modelers. Forrester's own computer simulation was entirely numerical with no visual interface. He ran the simulation and got a stack of printouts on lined paper. 
Will Wright put flesh onto Jay Forrester's equations, and gave them a 
decentralized, bottom-up existence. Cities assembled themselves (according to the laws and theories of the god Will Wright) on the computer screen. In essence, SimCity is an urban theory provided with a user interface. In the same sense, a dollhouse is a theory of the household. A novel is theory told as story. A flight simulator is an interactive theory of aviation. Simulated life is a theory of biology left to fend for itself. 
A theory abstracts the complicated pattern of real things into the facsimile 
pattern-a model, or a simulation. If done well, the miniature captures some integrity of the larger whole. Einstein, working at the peak of human talent, reduced the complexity of the cosmos to five symbols. His theory, or simulation, works. If done well, an abstraction becomes a creation.
There are many reasons to create. But what we create is always a world. I 
believe we may be unable to create anything less. We can create hurriedly, in fragments, in thumbnail sketches, and streams of consciousness, but always we are filling in an unfinished world of our own. Of course we sometimes doodle, literally and metaphorically. But we immediately see this for what it is: theory-free gibberish, and model-less nonsense. In essence, 
every creative act is no more or less than the reenactment of the Creation.

A few years ago, right before my eyes, a man with matted hair created an 
artificial world, a simulation of swaying fernlike arches rising off of an 
arabesque floor of maroon tiles and a tall red chimney going nowhere in particular. This world had no material form. It was a nether world that only two hours earlier had been a daydream in the man's imagination. Now it was a daydream circulating on a pair of Silicon Graphics computers.
The man donned magical goggles and climbed into his simulacra. I climbed 
in after him.
As far as I know, this descent into a man's daydream in the summer of 1989 
was the first time a human created an instant fantasy and let others crawl in to share it.
The man was Jaron Lanier, a round guy with a mop of rastafarian dreadlocks 
and a funny giggle, who always reminds me of Big Bird. He was nonchalant about entering and exiting a dreamland and talked about the travel like someone who had been exploring "the other side" for years. The walls of Jaron's company's office displayed fossils of past experimental magic goggles and gloves. The usual computer hardware and software paraphernalia littered the rest of the lab: soldering irons, floppy disks, soda cans, and in this case, ripped body suits woven with wires and bejeweled with connector plugs. 
Jaron's hi-tech method of generating visitable worlds had been pioneered 
years earlier by institutional researchers including NASA. Scores of people had already entered into disembodied imaginary worlds. Research worlds. But Jaron devised a low-rent system that worked even better than the university setups, and he built wildly unscientific "crazy worlds" on the fly. And Jaron coined a catchy name for the result: "virtual reality." 
To participate in a virtual reality, a visitor suits up into a uniform that is 
wired to monitor major body movements. The costume includes a face mask that can signal the movement of the head. Inside the mask are two tiny color video monitors which deliver the participant a vision of stereoscopic realism. From behind the mask it appears to the visitor that he inhabits a 3-D virtual reality. The general concept of a computer-generated reality is probably familiar to 
most readers because in the years following Jaron's demonstrations, the prospect of everyday virtual reality (VR) became a regular staple of magazine and TV news features. The surreal aspect was always emphasized. Eventually the Wall Street Journal headlined virtual reality as "An Electronic LSD."
I must confess that "drugs" were exactly my first thought watching Jaron 
disappear into his world. Here's a 29-year-old company founder wearing an electrified scuba mask. While I and other friends watch soberly, Jaron rolls slowly on the floor, mouth agape. He writhes into a new position, one arm pushing against the air, grasping nothing. Like a man possessed in slo-mo, he bends from one contortion to another as he explores hidden aspects of his newly minted universe. He carefully crawls across the carpet, stopping every so often to inspect some unseen wonder in the air before him. Watching him is eerie. His maneuvers follow a distant, internal logic, a separate reality. Occasionally, Jaron disturbs the quiet with a yelp of delight.
"Hey, the chalk pedestals are hollow! You can go up inside them and see the 
bottom of the rubies!" he squeals. Jaron himself had created the pedestals topped with red gems, but when he imagined them he hadn't bothered to consider their bottoms. A whole world is too complex to hold in one's head. But a simulation can play out those complexities. Again and again, Jaron reported back details in the world that he, the god, had not foreseen. Jaron's virtual world was like other simulations; the only way to predict what would happen was to run it.
Simulations are not new. Nor is visiting them. Toy worlds are a very early 
human invention, perhaps even a sign of humanity's emergence, since toys and games in a burial site are recognized by archaeologists as evidence of human culture. Certainly the urge to create toys arises very early in individual development. Children immerse themselves in their own artificial worlds of miniatures. Dolls and choo-choo trains properly belong to the microcosms of simulation. So does much of the great art in our culture: Persian miniatures, painterly landscape realism, Japanese tea gardens, and perhaps all novels and theater. Tiny worlds. 
But now in the computer age-the age of simulations-we are making tiny 
worlds in larger bandwidths, with more interaction, and with deeper embodiment. We've come from inert figurines to SimCity. Some simulations, like Disneyland, are no longer so tiny.
Anything at all, in fact, is a candidate for a simulation when it is given 
energy, possible behaviors, and room to grow. We live in a culture that is rapidly animating a million objects into simulations by electrifying them with smartness. A telephone switchboard becomes a simulated operator voice, a car becomes a tiger in a commercial, fake trees and robotic alligators become a simulated jungle in an amusement park. We don't even blink anymore.
In the early 1970s the Italian novelist Umberto Eco drove around America 
visiting as many low-brow roadside attractions as he could get to. Eco was a semiotician-a decipherer of unnoticed signs. He found America trafficking in subtle messages about simulations and degrees of reality. The national icon, Coca-Cola, as an example, advertised itself as "the real thing." Wax museums were Eco's favorite text. The more kitsch-laden they were with altarlike velvet drapes and soft narrations, the better. Eco found wax museums to be populated with exquisite copies of real people (Brigitte Bardot in a bikini) and exquisite fakes of fictional characters (Ben Hur in a chariot race). Both history and fantasy were sculptured in equally realistic and neurotic detail so that there was no boundary between the real and faked. Tableau artists spared no effort in rendering an unreal character in supreme realism. Mirrors reflected one period room's figures into another time period to further blur the distinction of real and not. Between San Francisco and Los Angeles, Eco was able to visit seven wax versions of Leonardo's Last Supper. Each you'll-never-be-the-same-afterwards waxwork tried to outdo the other in degree of faithful realism to a fictionalized painting. 
Eco wrote that he was on a "journey into hyperreality, in search of instances 
where the American imagination demands the real thing and, to attain it, must fabricate the absolute fake." The reality of the absolute fake Eco called hyperreality. In hyperreality, as Eco puts it, "absolute unreality is offered as real presence." 
A perfect simulation and a computer toy world are works of hyperreality. 
They fake so wholly that as a whole they have a reality.
French pop-philosopher Jean Baudrillard opens his small book, Simulations 
(1983), with these two tightly wound paragraphs: 
If we were able to take as the finest allegory of simulation the Borges tale where the cartographers of the Empire draw up a map so detailed that it ends up exactly covering the territory (but where the decline of the Empire sees this map become frayed and finally ruined, a few threads still discernible in the deserts...) then this fable has come full circle for us...
Abstraction today is no longer that of the map, the double, the 
mirror or the concept. Simulation is no longer that of a territory, a referential being, or a substance. It is the generation of models of a real without origin or reality: a hyperreal. The territory no longer precedes the map, nor survives it. Henceforth, it is the map that precedes the territory-PRECESSION OF SIMULACRA-it is the map that engenders the territory and if we were to revive the fable today, it would be the territory whose shreds are slowly rotting across the map. It 
is the real, and not the map, whose vestiges subsist here and there, in the deserts which are no longer of the Empire, but our own. The desert of the real itself.
In the desert of the real, we are busy building paradises of the hyperreal. It is the model (the map) that we prefer. Steven Levy, author of Artificial Life (1991), a book that celebrates the advent of simulations so rich that we can only declare them alive, rephrases Baudrillard's point this way: "The map is not the territory, but a map is a territory."
However, the territory of the simulacra is blank. The absolute fake is so 
obvious that it is still invisible to us. We have no taxonomy yet to differentiate subtle types of simulations. Take simulacra's long list of indistinct synonyms: fake, phony, counterfeit, replication, artificial, second grade, phantom, image, reproduction, deception, camouflage, pretense, imitation, false appearance, pretended, effigy, an enactment, shadow, shade, insincerity, a mask, disguise, substitute, surrogate, feign, parody, a copy, something bluffed, a sham, a lie. The word simulacra is a word loaded with heavy karma. 
The Greek Epicureans, a school of radical philosophers who figured out there 
must be atoms, had an unusual theory of vision. They believed every object gave off an "idol" (eidola). The same concept came to be called simulacra in Latin. Lucretius, a Roman Epicurean, says you can think of simulacra as "images of things, a sort of outer skin perpetually peeled off the surfaces of objects and flying about this way and that through the air." 
These simulacra were physical, but ethereal, things. Invisible simulacra 
emanated from an object and impinged upon the eye causing vision. A thing's reflection assembled in a mirror demonstrated the existence of simulacra; how else could there be two of them, and one so diaphanous? Simulacra, the Epicureans believed, could enter into people's senses through their pores while they slept, thus conveying the idols (images) carried in dreams. Art and paintings captured the idols radiated by the original subject, just as flypaper might catch bugs.
A simulacra then was a derived entity, second to the original, a parallel 
image-or to use modern words, a virtual reality.
In the Roman vernacular simulacrum came to mean a statue or image that 
was animated by a ghost or spirit. Thus its Greek predecessor, the term idol, crept into the English language in 1382, when the first English Bible needed a word to describe the hyperreality of animated, and sometimes talking, statues that were presented as gods.
Some of these ancient temple automatons were quite elaborate. They had 
moving heads and limbs, and tubes to channel voices from behind them. Ancient people were far more sophisticated than we often give them credit 
for. No one mistook the idols for the real god they represented. But no one ignored the idol's presence, either. The idol really moved and said things; it had its own behavior. The idols were neither real nor faked-they were real idols. In Eco's terms, they were hyperreal, just as Murphy Brown, a virtual character on TV, is treated as kind of real.
We post-modern urbanites spend a huge portion of our day immersed in 
hyperrealities: phone conversations, TV viewing, computer screens, radio worlds. We value them highly. Try to have a dinner conversation without referencing something you saw or heard via the media! Simulacra have become the terrain we live in. In most ways we care to measure, the hyperreal is real for us. We enter and leave hyperreality with ease.
Take, for instance, a hyperreality that Jaron Lanier built months after his 
first instant world. Not long after he was done, I immersed myself in his world of idols and simulacra. This artificial reality included a circle of railway track about a block in diameter and a locomotive about chest high. The ground was pink, the train light gray. Other blocky figures lay about like so many dropped toys. The shape of the choo-choo train and toys were aggregations of polygons-no graceful curves. Colors were uniform and bright. When I turned my head, the scene shifted in a stuttered way. Shadows were stark. The sky was an empty dark blue with no hint of distance or space. I had the impression of being a toon in Toontown.
A gloved hand-roughly rendered in tiny polygonal blocks-floated in front of 
me. It was my hand. I flexed the disembodied thing. When I mentally willed the hand into a point, I began to fly in the direction of my finger. I flew over to the small train engine and sat on it or above it, I couldn't tell. I reached out my floating hand and yanked a lever on the train. The train began to circle and I could watch the pink landscape go by. At some point I hopped off the train near an inverted top hat. I stood and watched the train chug around the loop of track without me. I bent to grab the top hat and the instant I touched it, it turned into a white rabbit.
I heard someone outside the world laugh, a heavenly chuckle. That was the 
god's little joke. 
The disappearance of the top hat was real, in a hyperreality way. The trainy 
thing really started and eventually really stopped. It was really going around in circles. When I flew I really transposed a distance of some sort. To anyone watching me on the outside, I was a guy stiffly gyrating in a carpeted office in the same odd way that Jaron did. But inside, hyperreal events really happened. Anyone else visiting could corroborate; there was consensual evidence. In the parallel world of the simulacra, they were real.
continue...   
 
Out of Control
Hand wringing about the reality of simulations would be an appropriate 
academic exercise for French and Italian philosophers, if simulacra didn't 
turn out to be so useful.
In the Entertainment & Information Systems Group at the MIT Media Lab, 
Andy Lippman is developing an approach to television transmission that "lets the audience drive." A major objective of the Media Lab's research is to allow the consumer to personalize the presentation of information. Lippman invented a scheme to deliver video in an ultracompact form which can then be unpacked in a thousand different ways. He does this by transmitting not a staid image but a simulacra.
In the demo that he shows, Lippman's group took an early episode of "I 
Love Lucy" and extracted a visual model of Lucy's living room from the footage. Lucy's living room becomes a virtual living room on a hard disk. Any part or view of it can be displayed on cue. Lippman then used a computer to remove Lucy's moving image from the background scenes. When he wants to transmit the entire episode, he sends two kinds of data: the background as a virtual model and the film of Lucy moving. The viewer's computer reassembles Lucy's character moving against a background produced by the model. Thus Lippman can broadcast the living room set data only once in a single burst-not continuously as is normal-updating only when the scene or light shifts. Says Lippman, "Conceivably, we might choose to store all of the background sets from a TV serial at the front of a single optical disk, while the action and camera motion instructions needed to reconstitute 25 episodes could fit on the remaining tracks."
Nicholas Negroponte, director of the Media Lab, speaks of this method as 
"transmission of models rather than content, so content is something the receiver derives from the model." He extrapolates from the simple "I Love Lucy" experiment to a future when entire scenes, figures and all, are modeled into simulacra to be transmitted. Rather than broadcast a two-dimensional picture of a ball, send a simulacra of the ball. The broadcasting machine says "Here is a simulacra of a ball: shiny blue, with a dimension of 50 centimeters, moving at this velocity and direction." The receiving machines says, "Umm yes, a simulacra of a bouncing ball. Oh, I see it," and displays the hopping blue ball as a moving hologram. Now the home viewer can visually examine the ball from any perspective he wants. As a commercial example, Negroponte suggests broadcasting a holographic 
image of a football game into living rooms. Rather than merely sending the data for the game's two-dimensional image, the sports station transmits a simulacra of the game; the stadium, players, and plays are abstracted into a model which can be compressed for transmission. The receiving machine in the home unpacks the model into visual form. The couch potato with a six-pack sees a dynamic mirage of the players as they rush, pass, and punt in 3-D. He chooses the angle he wants to watch it from. His kids can horse around by watching the game from the ball's point of view.
Besides being able to "break the tyranny of video as prepackaged frames," 
the purpose of transmitting simulacra is primarily data compression. Real-time holography requires astronomical amounts of bits. Using all the smart processing tricks in the foreseeable future, a state-of-the-art supercomputer would spend hours computing a few seconds of a real-time holograph the size of a TV console. The ball game would be over before you saw the last of the amazing (and terrifying in three dimensions) opening flying logos.
What better way to compress a complication than to model it, mail it, and let 
the recipient supply the intelligent details? Transmitting a simulacra is not a step down from transmitting reality. It is a step up from transmitting data. 
The military is keen on simulacra as well.

In an unnamed stretch of desert, in the spring of 1991, Captain H. R. 
McMaster of the U.S. 2d Armored Cavalry Regiment paced over the quiet 
battlefield. Hardly a month had passed since he had last been there. The rocky sand was quiet and still now. Iraqi tanks lay in twisted wrecks just as he had left them a few weeks ago, although now they no longer burned like an inferno. Thank God he and his troops had all survived; the Iraqis had not done as well. A month ago neither side knew they were engaged in the pivotal battle of the Desert Storm war. Things moved fast; thirty days after their fateful skirmish, historians already had a name for it: The Battle of 73 Easting.
Now Captain McMaster was at this desolate site again. He had reconvened at 
the behest of some crazy analysts back in the States. The Pentagon wanted all troop officers gathered at the battlefield while the U.S. still controlled the territory, and while their memories were fresh. The Army was going to recreate the entire 73 Easting battle as a fully three-dimensional simulated reality which any future cadet could enter and relive. "A living history book," they called it. A simulacra of war.
On the plains of Iraq, the real soldiers sketched out the month-old battle. 
They walked off the action as best their feverish memories of the day could remind them. A few soldiers supplied diaries to reconstruct their actions. A couple even consulted personal tape recordings taken during the chaos. Tracks in the sand gave the simulators precise traces of movement. A black box in each tank, programmed to track three satellites, confirmed the exact position on the ground to eight digits. Every missile shot left a thin wire trail which lay undisturbed in the sand. Headquarters had a tape recording of radio voice communications from the field. Sequenced overhead photos from satellite cameras gave the big view. Soldiers paced the sun-baked ground in hot arguments sorting out who shot whom. A digital map of the terrain was captured by lasers and radar. When the Pentagon left, they had all the information they needed to recreate history's most documented battle.
Back at the Simulation Center, a department at the Institute for Defense 
Analysis in Alexandria, Virginia, technicians spent nine months digesting this overdose of information and compiling a synthetic reality from a thousand fragments. A few months into the project, they had the actual desert troops, then stationed in Germany, review a preliminary version of the recreation. The simulacra were sufficiently fleshed out that the soldiers could sit in tank 
simulators and enter the virtual battle. They reported corrections of the simulated event to the techies, who modified the model. Just about one year after the confrontation, following the final review by Captain McMaster, the recreated Battle of 73 Easting premiered for the military brass. McMaster laconically understates that the simulacra give "a very realistic sensation of being in a vehicle in that battle." Every vehicle and soldier's movements, gun fire, and fall were captured in facsimile. A four-star general, who was far from the battlefield but close to the human consequences of war, entered the virtual battle and came out with the hair on his arm on end. What did he see?
A panoramic view on three 50-inch TV screens at the resolution of a very 
good video game. The sky is jet black with oil-fire smoke. A floor of ashen gray desert, wet from rain earlier, recedes to the black horizon. Steel blue hulks of demolished tanks spew tongues of yellow-orange fire which lean and drift in the steady wind. Over 300 vehicles-tanks, jeeps, fuelers, water trucks, even two Iraqi Chevy pickups-roam the landscape. Late in the day a wicked forty-knot Shamal sandstorm kicks up, cutting visibility to a yellow haze of 1,000 meters. Individual infantry soldiers march on the screen. Likewise hundreds of Iraqi soldiers who scramble from their muddy spider holes to hop into their tanks when they realize the shelling is not a precision air attack. Helicopters show up for about six minutes, but the blowing sand shoos them away. Fixed-wing aircraft are deep into another battle behind Iraqi lines.
To enter the battle, the general can pick any vehicle and see what that 
driver would see. As in the real battle, a low hill might hide a tank. Views are blocked, important things hidden, nothing is clear, everything is happening at once. But in the virtual world you can mount every soldier's dream of a flying carpet and zoom around high above the action. Go up far enough and you get a maplike God's-eye point of view. The truly demented can enter the simulation sitting astride a missile madly arching toward its target.
It's just a three-dimensional movie right now. But here's the next step: 
allow future cadets to take on the Republican Guard by unleashing what-ifs into the simulation. What if the Iraqis had infrared night vision? What if their missiles had twice the range? What if they weren't out of their tanks at first? Would you still win?
Without the ability to what-if, The Battle of 73 Easting simulation is a very 
expensive and fanatical documentary. But animated with the tiniest liberty to run in unplanned directions, the simulation takes on a soul and becomes a powerful teacher. It becomes something real in itself. It is no longer just the Battle of 73 Easting. Tuned to different values, equipped with different powers, the model war begins in the same place with the same formation, but quickly runs into its own future. The cadets immersed in the simulation are fighting a hyperreal war, a war only they know about and which only they can fight. The alternative battles they wage are as real as the simulated 73 Easting battle is real, or perhaps even realer, because these battles have 
unknown endings, much as real life does.
On an everyday basis, the U.S. military thrusts troops into the realm of the 
hyperreal. At a dozen U.S. Army bases around the world, top-gun tank and aircraft pilots compete in simulated AirLand battles, woven together by a military system called SIMNET, the same window through which the four-star general entered the recreated 73 Easting Battle. In the words of National Defense columnist Douglas Nelms, SIMNET "transports crews of land and aerial vehicles from planet Earth to a surrogate world where they can do battle without the constraints of safety, cost, environmental impact or geographical boundaries." The first place the SIMNET warriors explore is their backyard. At Fort Knox, Tennessee, 80 crews of M1 tank simulators drive through an amazing virtual reconstruction of Fort Knox's outdoor wargaming arena. Every tree, every building, every creek, every telephone pole, every dip in the land for hundreds of square miles is digitized and represented inside the three-dimensional land of the SIMNET model. The virtual space is huge enough to easily get lost in. One day the troops may ride their greasy real tanks over the real course, and the next day they may traverse the same terrain in facsimile. Only the simulation doesn't smell like burning diesel. When the troops master Fort Knox they can beam themselves to another location by choosing from the computer's menu. Up comes one of two dozen other immaculately rendered places: Fort Irwin's famous National Training Grounds, parts of rural Germany, hundreds of thousands of empty square miles of the oil-rich Gulf States, and (why not?) downtown Moscow.
Standard M1 tanks are the most common entity in the virtual land of 
SIMNET. Seen from the outside, an M1 simulator never moves: it's a big fiberglass box about the shape of an oversize dumpster that is bolted to the floor. A crew of four men squat, sit, and recline at their cramped stations. The inside is molded in plastic to resemble the gadget-filled interior of the M1. The men twirl hundreds of facsimile dials and switches and peer into monitors. When the pilot puts a tank simulator into gear, it rumbles, groans, and shakes much like the ride in a real tank. 
Eight or more of these fiberglass boxes are electronically linked in the drab 
Fort Knox warehouse. One M1 can play against the other M1s in SIMNET-land. Long-haul telephone lines link the other 300 existing simulator boxes worldwide into one network, so that 300 vehicles can be hurling through the same virtual battle, even though some of the crew may be at Fort Irwin, California, and others in Graffenvere, Germany. 
To boost the realism of SIMNET, military hackers devised vehicles steered by 
artificial intelligence which are loosely herded by one computer operator. Launching these "semi-automated forces" onto the virtual battlefield, the army can get a bigger, more realistic engagement of forces beyond the 300 simulator boxes built. Says Neale Cosby, who runs the Simulation Center, "We once had a thousand entities on SIMNET at the same time. One guy at a console can throw out 17 semi-automated vehicles, or a company of 
tanks. " Cosby explains the practical virtues of semi-automated forces: "Let's say you are the captain of a national guard unit. You're in charge of an armory of 100 guys coming in on Saturday morning. You want to run your company in a defensive posture, and you want to be attacked by a battalion of 500 people. Well, where are you going to get 500 people Saturday morning in downtown San Diego? So the idea is you can call up SIMNET and have three other guys, each operating a couple of consoles, run those forces against you. You send a message: tonight at 2100 meet us on the Panama database and be ready to go. You could be talking to guys in Germany, Panama, Kansas, and California, and we'd all meet on the same piece of virtual map-sheet. The thing about semi-automated vehicles is that you wouldn't know if they were real or Memorex." 
He obviously meant you wouldn't know if they were real simulations or fake 
simulations (the hyperreal), a modern distinction the military is only now coming to appreciate. The slippery fuzz between the real, the faked, and the hyperreally faked can be used to some advantage in war. U.S. Forces in the Gulf War overturned popular opinion of the relative expertise of both sides. Conventional wisdom said Iraq's forces were older, experienced, and battle hardened; the U.S.'s were young, inexperienced, and couch potatoes with joy sticks. Conventional wisdom was right; only about 1 out of 15 U.S. pilots had previous combat experience; most were fresh out of flight school. Yet the lopsided victory of the U.S. could not be accounted for merely by the absence of gumption from Iraq. Military insiders point to simulation training. A retired colonel asked one commander of the Battle of 73 Easting, "How do you account for your dramatic success, when not a single officer or man in your entire outfit ever had combat experience, and yet you beat Republican Guards who were operating on their own combat training maneuver grounds?" The troop leader answered, "But we were experienced. We had fought such engagements six times before in complete battle simulations at the National Training Center and in Germany. It was no different than practice."
Participants of the Battle of 73 Easting were not unique. Ninety percent of 
the U.S. Air Force units in Desert Storm, and 80 percent of the leaders of the ground forces had intensive training in battle simulations beforehand. The National Training Center (NTC) polished a soldier's SIMNET experience with another level of simulation. NTC, a Rhode Island-size blank spot on the map in the western deserts of California, uses a $100 million hi-tech laser and radio network to simulate battle with real tanks in a real desert. Cocky U.S. veterans dress in Russian uniforms, fight to Russian rules, and occasionally communicate in Russian as they play the home team opposing force (Opfor). They have a reputation of being unbeatable. But not only did U.S. trainees play against mock Iraqi forces drilled in Soviet tactics, but in some cases they simulated specific battle tactics until "they were second nature." For instance, the attack program for the awesome air blitz against Baghdad's targets had been rehearsed in simulated detail for months by U.S. pilots. As a result, only one out of 600 allied aircraft failed to return that first night. Colonel Paul Kern, the commander of a Gulf infantry brigade, told the electrical engineer's journal IEEE Spectrum, "Almost every 
commander I talked to said the combat situations they found in Iraq were not as hard as what they'd encounter at NTC." 
What the military is groping towards is "embedded training"-training 
simulation so real it is indistinguishable from actual combat. It is no leap of faith for the gunner of a modern tank, or a modern jetfighter, to imagine gaining more combat experience in SIMNET simulators than in an Iraqi war. A real tank gunner in a real tank reclines in a tiny windowless burrow tucked into the bowels of a multimillion-dollar steel capsule. He is surrounded by electronics and dials and LED readouts. His only portal to the outside battlefield is on the tiny TV monitor in front of his face which he can swivel like a periscope with his hands. His only link to the rest of his crew is through a headset. For all practical purposes a real gunner in a real tank operates a simulation. For all he knows, the numbers on his dials and the picture on his screen, even the image of the explosion his missiles generate, could be fantasized by a computer. What difference does it make for his job whether the one-inch-tall tanks on his monitor are "real" or not? 
For a combatant of the Battle of 73 Easting, simulations came as a trinity. 
The soldier fought the battle first as a simulation, secondly for real via the simulation of monitors and sensors, and thirdly in the recreated simulation for history. Perhaps someday he wouldn't really be able to tell the difference between them.
That worrisome notion came up once at a NATO-sponsored conference on 
"Embedded Training," convened to examine this problem. As Michael Moshell, of the Institute for Simulation and Training, recalls, someone read the punch line of a memorable 1985 science fiction novel called Ender's Game, written by Orson Scott Card. Card originally wrote Ender's Game inside the virtual space of the GEnie teleconferencing system, for an audience who appreciated the hyperreal aspects of online life. In this tale, young boys are trained from childhood to be generals. They play nonstop tactical and strategic games in a zero-gravity space station. Their military training culminates as serious computer war games. Eventually, the most brilliant player and born leader, Ender, supervises a group of teammates in a massive and complex video war game against his adult mentor. Unbeknownst to them the mentor switches the inputs so that the Nintendo kids in reality are commanding galactic star ships (full of real people) fending off real hostile aliens invading the solar system. The kids win by blowing up the aliens' planet. Later they are told the truth: That wasn't just practice.
A reality switch could be made at other points, too. If there is little 
difference between simulated tank practice and real war, why not use simulated practice to fight a real war? If you can drive a tank through simulated Iraq from a plastic box connected in Kansas, why not drive a tank through real Iraq from the same safe place? That dream, which meshes so nicely with the Pentagon number-one mandate to lessen U.S. casualties, flitters all across the military these days. Prototype passengerless roving 
jeeps driven by "telepresent" operators back at the base already zip down real roads. These robo-soldiers keep "humans in the loop" but out of harm's way as the Army prefers. Unmanned but human-piloted aircraft played an immense part in the recent Gulf war. Imagine a very big model airplane loaded with video cameras and computers. These remotely guided planes, steered from bases in Saudi Arabia, served as spy platforms or command relays hovering directly over hostile territory. At the back end, a human leaned into a simulation.
The military's forward vision is big but slow. The power of cheap smart chips 
is ballooning faster than the Pentagon can think ahead. As far as I can discern, as of 1992, military simulations and war games are only marginally advanced over commercial versions for the public. 

Jordan Weisman and buddy Ross Babcock were naval cadets at the 
Merchant Marine Academy, and deep into dungeons-and-dragons fantasy 
games. Once on a naval tour they got a peek at a supertanker bridge simulator, a wall of monitors that could fake the color details of a passage through 50 different harbors around the world. They were dying to play. Sorry, this is not a toy, the brass told them. Yes it is, they knew. So they decided to build their own. A simulated world that would let others into their secret of fantasy worlds. They'd use plywood, Radio Shack electronic parts, some homegrown software. And, they would charge admission.
Weisman and Babcock launched BattleTech in 1990. Funded by their 
lucrative success in the role-playing game business, and based on one of their game's premises, the $2.5 million center runs seven days a week in a mall on the North Pier in downtown Chicago. (With new investment from Tim Disney, Walt's grandson, other centers are opening up around the country.) "Just follow the noise," the attendant on the phone says when I asked for directions. Rowdy teenagers linger at the Star Trek-styled storefront where T-shirts stamped "No Guts, No Galaxy" hang for sale. 
BattleTech bears an uncanny resemblance to SIMNET: a set of twelve 
cramped boxes bolted to a concrete floor linked in an electronic network. Each box is detailed with futuristic nonsense of the outside ("Beware of Blast") and inside stuffed with glorious "switchology"-knobs, meters, flashing lights-a sliding seat, two computer screens, a microphone by which to communicate with teammates, and a few working controls. You steer with foot pedals (as on a tank), you accelerate with a throttle, and you fire with a joystick. At the whistle, the game flickers to life. You are immersed in a red-sand desert world chasing other legged tanks ( la Return of the Jedi) and being chased in return. The rules are war simple: it's kill or be killed. Driving through the red desert world is cool. The other "mechs," as they are called, dashing about madly in this simulated world are steered by 11 other customers crouched in adjacent boxes. Half are supposed to be on your side, but in the booming mayhem its hard to tell who's who. I see on my readout that my teammates (whom I've not really met) are Doughboy, Ratman, and Genghis. Apparently I'm just "Kevin" on their monitors since I neglected to supply a "handle" before setting off. We are all novices dying early. I am a journalist doing research. Who are they? Predominantly unmarried males in their twenties, according to a Michigan 
State University study on fanatical users of the game. The report surveys veterans who have played at least 200 games (at $6 a pop!). Some masters live and work at BattleTech Center calling it "home." I talked to several who've played over a thousand games. Masters of BattleTech claim that it took them about 5 games merely to get used to driving the mech and firing basic weapons, and about 50 games to master cooperating with others. Team-playing is the whole point. Masters see BattleTech primarily as a social contract. To a man (and every master but one is male) they believe that wherever new networked virtual worlds would emerge, special communities of people would come to live in them. When asked what compels them to return to the BattleTech simulated world, the masters mention "the other people," "being able to find competent foes," "fame and glory," "compatible teammates." 
The survey queried 47 maniacal players and asked them what BattleTech 
should change; only two replied that the management should work on "improving reality." Rather the majority wanted lower costs, less crashable software, more of the same ("more mechs, more terrain, more missiles"). Most of all, they wanted more players inside the simulation. 
This is the call of the Net. Keep adding players. The more they are 
connected, the more valuable my connection becomes. It is revealing that these obsessive game players realize they get more "reality" by increasing the fullness of the network than they get by increasing the visual resolution of the environment. Reality is first coevolutionary dynamics, only secondly is it six million pixels. 
More is different. Keep adding grains of sand to the first grain and you'll get 
a dune, which is altogether different than a single grain. Keep adding players to the Net and you get...what?...something very different...a distributed being, a virtual world, a hive mind, a networked community.
While the behemoth size of the military quells innovation, its gigantic scale 
allows the military to attempt the grand-which nimble commercial entrepreneurs cannot. DARPA, the highly regarded creative research and development branch of the defense department, has drawn up an ambitious next step beyond SIMNET. DARPA would like a 21st century style of simulation. When Col. Jack Thorpe from DARPA gives military briefings promoting this new kind of simulation, he throws up a couple of slides on the overhead projector. One says, Simulation: a Strategic U.S. Technology. Another proclaims, 
Simulate Before You Build! 
Simulate Before You Buy! Simulate Before You Fight! Thorpe is trying to sell the top brass and the military industrialists the key 
idea that they can get better weapons per buck applying simulation at every point in the process. By designing technology via simulations, testing them via simulated action before committing money for them, and then training users and officers via simulations before actually unwrapping the hardware, they gain a strategic advantage. 
"Simulate Before you Build" is already happening to a degree. Northrop built 
the B-2 stealth bomber without paper. It was simulated in a computer instead. Some industrial experts call the B-2 "the most complex system ever to be simulated." The entire project was designed as a computer simulacra so intricate and precise that Northrop didn't bother fabricating a mechanical mock-up before actually building the billion-dollar plane. Normally a system consisting of 30,000 parts entails redesigning 50 percent of the parts during the course of actual construction. Northrop's "simulate-first" approach reduced that number of refitted parts to 3 percent.
Boeing explored the idea of a hypothetical tilting-rotor aircraft, called the VS-
X, by constructing it in virtual reality first. Once built as a simulacra, Boeing sent more than 100 of its engineers and staff inside the simulated aircraft to evaluate it. As one small example of the advantage of simulated building, Boeing's engineers discovered that a critical pressure gauge in the maintenance hatch was obscured from view no matter how hard the crew tried to look at it. So the hatch was redesigned before building, saving millions.
The elaborate platform for this pervasive simulation is code-named ADST, an 
awkward acronym that stands for Advanced Distributed Simulation Technology. The key word is "Distributed." Col. Thorpe's distributed simulation technology is nothing less than visionary: a seamless distributed military/industrial complex. A seamless distributed army. A seamless distributed war hyperreality. Imagine a thin film of optical fibers spanning the globe opening a portal to real-time, broadband, multiuser, 3-D simulation. Any soldier who wants to plug into a hyperreal battle, or any defense manufacturer who wants to test a possible product in a virtual reality, need only jack into the great international superhighway-in-the-sky known as Internet. Ten thousand decentralized simulators linked into a single virtual world. Thousands of different kinds of simulators-virtual jeeps, simulated ships, Marines with head-mounts, and shadow forces generated by artificial intelligences-are all summed together into one seamless consensual simulacra.

Armies win and mobs lose. And the lone Rambo always dies. The most 
important thing the military knows more about than anyone else is in how to 
make teams work. Teams are what transform mobs into armies and Rambos into soldiers. Col. Thorpe rightly proclaims that distributed intelligence-not firepower-wins wars. Other visionaries say the same about the future of corporations. "The next breakthrough won't be in the individual interface but in the team interface," says John Seely Brown, the research director of Xerox's PARC.
If Col. Thorpe has his way, the four divisions of the U.S. military and 
hundreds of industrial contractors become a single interconnected superorganism. The immediate step to this world of distributed intelligence and distributed presence is an engineering protocol developed by a consortium of defense simulation centers in Orlando, Florida. Known as the DSI (Distributed Simulation Internet) protocol, this standard permits independent bits of simulation (a tank here, a building there) to be interleaved into a unified simulation when sent over the existing Internet. In effect, a scene emerges in this virtual space as sufficient parts of it are supplied from afar and assembled in the marvelous decentralized way of swarms. The entire hyperreality of a 10,000-piece battle scene is distributed across many computers through the optic fibers of Internet. The outfit supplying detailed virtual mountains may not supply surging rivers or creeks and may not know whether creeks are flowing down its mountains at all.
Distributed intelligence is the way to go. Students on the Internet (which 
was developed by DARPA but now is global and demilitarized) can't wait. They see the promise of distributed simulations and have begun making their own versions in quiet corners of the Net.

David spends twelve hours a day as a swashbuckling explorer in a 
subterranean world of dungeons and elves. He plays a character called 
Lotsu. He should be in class getting A grades. Instead he has succumbed to the latest fad sweeping college campuses: total immersion into multiuser fantasy games. 
Multiuser fantasy games are electronic adventures run on a large network 
fed by university and personal computers. Players commonly spend four or five hours a day logged into fantasy worlds based on Star Trek, the Hobbit, or Anne McCaffrey's popular novels about dragon-riders and wizards. 
Students like David use school computers, or their own personal machine, to 
log onto the Internet. This mega-network, now collectively funded by governments, universities, and private corporations around the world, subsidizes all ordinary passengers traveling across it. Colleges freely issue Internet accounts to any student wanting to do "research." By logging on from a dorm in Boston, a student can "drive" to any participating computer in the world, link up for free and stay connected for as long as he or she wishes.
What can one do with such virtual travel, besides downloading papers on 
genetic algorithms? If 100 other students were to suddenly show up in the same virtual place, it might be pretty cool. You could: throw a party, devise pranks, role-play, scheme, and plot to build a better world. All at the same time. The only thing you'd need is a multiuser place to meet. A place to swarm online.
In 1978, Roy Trubshaw wrote an electronic role-playing game similar to 
Dungeons and Dragons while he was in his final undergraduate year at Essex College in England. The following year, his classmate Richard Bartle took over the game, expanding the number of potential players and their options for action. Trubshaw and Bartle called the game MUD, for Multi-User Dungeons, and put it onto the Internet.
MUD is very much like the classic game ZORK, or any of the hundreds of 
text-based adventure video games that have flourished on personal computers since day one. The computer screen says: "You are in a cold, damp dungeon lit by a flickering torch. There is a skull on the stone floor. One hallway leads to the north, the other south. There is a grate on the 
grimy floor."
Your job is to explore the room and its objects and eventually discover 
treasures hidden in the labyrinth of other rooms connected to it. You'll probably need to find a small collection of treasures and clues along the way in order to win the motherlode booty, which is usually to break a spell, or become a wizard, or kill the dragon, or escape the dungeon. 
You explore by typing something like: "Look skull." The computer replies: 
"The skull says, 'Beware of the rat.'" You type: "Look grate" and the computer replies: "This way lies Death." You type: "Go north," and you exit through the tunnel on your way into the unknown in the next room.
MUD and its many improved offspring (known generically as MUDs, MUSEs, 
TinyMUDs, etc.) are very similar to classic 1970s-style adventure games but with two powerful improvements. First, MUDs can handle up to 100 other human players immersed in the dungeon along with you. This is the distributed, parallel characteristic of MUDs. The others can be playing alongside you as jolly partners, or against you as wicked adversaries, or above you as capricious gods creating miracles and spells. 
Secondly, and most significantly, the other players (and yourself) can be at 
work adding rooms, modifying passages, or inventing new and magical objects. You say to yourself, "What this place needs is a tower where a bearded elf can enslave the unwary." So you make one. In short, the players invent the world as they live in it. The game is to create a cooler world than you had yesterday.
MUDs then become a parallel, distributed platform for a consensual 
superorganism to emerge. Someone tinkers up a virtual holodeck for the heck of it. Later, someone else adds a captain's bridge and maybe an engine room. Next thing you know you have built the Starship Enterprise in text. Over the course of months, several hundred other players (who should be doing calculus homework) jack in and build a fleet of rooms and devices until you wind up with fully staffed Klingon battleships, Vulcan planets, and the interconnected galaxies of a StarTrek MUD. (Such a place exists on the Internet.) You can log on at any time, 24 hours a day, greet fellow members of the crew-all in role-playing characters-to collectively obey orders broadcast by the captain, and battle enemy ships built and managed by a different set of players.
The more hours one spends exploring and hacking the MUD-world, the more 
status one earns from the rulers overseeing that world. A player who assists newcomers, or who takes on janitorial chores in keeping the database going, can earn increasing rank and power, such as being able to teleport for free or being exempt from certain everyday laws. Ultimately every MUDer dreams of achieving local god or wizard status. Some become better gods than others. Ideally, gods promote fair play, keep the system going, and 
help those "below." But stories of abusive and deranged gods are legendary on the Internet. 
Real-life events are recapitulated within MUDs and TinyMUDs. Players will 
hold funerals and wakes for characters who die. There have been TinyWeddings for virtual and real people. The slipperiness between real life and virtual life is one of MUD's chief attractions, particularly for teenage kids who are wrestling with their identity.
On a MUD, you define who you are. As you enter a room, others read your 
description: "Judi enters. She is a tall, dark-haired Vulcan woman, with small pointed ears, and a lovely reddish tinge to her skin. She walks with a gymnast's bounce. Her green eyes seem to flirt." The author may be petite female with a bad case of acne, or she may be a bearded male masquerading as a women. So many female-presenting characters are actually males pretending at this point that most savvy MUDers now assume all players to be male unless proven otherwise. This has led to a weird prejudice against true female players who are subject to the harassment of "proving" their gender. 
Most players live out virtual life with more than one character, as if they are 
trying out various facets of their persona. "MUDs are a workshop for the concept of identity," says Amy Bruckman, a MIT researcher who studies the sociological aspects of MUDs and TinyMUDs. "Many players notice that they are somehow different on the net than off, and this leads them to reflect on who they are in real life." Flirting, infatuation, romance, and even TinySex are as ubiquitous in MUD worlds as on real campuses. Only the characters vary. 
Sherry Turkle, who calls the computer an occasion for a "second self" goes 
further. She says, "On a MUD, the self is multiplied and decentralized." It is no coincidence that a multiple, decentralized structure is the emerging model for understanding real-life, healthy human selves. 
Pranks are also rampant. One demented player devised an invisible "spud" 
that, when accidentally picked up by another player we'll call Visitor, would remove Visitor's limbs. Others in the room would read: "Visitor rolls about on the floor, twitching excitedly." The gods were summoned to fix player Visitor. But as soon as they "looked" at him, they too got spudded, so that everyone would read, "Wizard rolls about on the floor, twitching excitedly." Ordinary objects can be booby-trapped to do almost anything. A favorite pastime is to manufacture a neat object and get others to copy it without knowing its true powers. For example, when you innocently inspect a "Home Sweet Home" cross-stitch hanging on someone's wall, it might instantly and forcibly teleport you home (while it flashes "There is no place like home"). 
Since most MUDers are 20-year-old males, violence often permeates these worlds. Elaborate slash-'n'-hack universes repel all but the most thick 
skinned. But one experimental world running at MIT outlaws all killing and has gathered a huge following of elementary and high school kids. The world, Cyberion City, is modeled on a cylindrical space station. On any one day about 500 kids beam up into Cyberion City to roam or build without ceasing. So far the kids have built 50,000 objects, characters, and rooms. There's a mall with multiplex cinema (and text movies written by kids), a city hall, science museum, a Wizard of Oz theme park, a CB radio network, acres of housing suburbs, and a tour bus. A robot real estate agent roams around making deals with anyone who wants to buy a house. 
There is deliberately no map of Cyberion City. To explore is the thrill. Not to 
be told how things work is the teacher. You are expected to do what the kids do: ask another kid. As Barry Kort, the real-life administrator of the project, says, "One of the charms of entering an unfamiliar environment and culture such as Cyberion City is that it tends to put adults and children back on an equal footing. Some adults would say it reverses the balance of power." The main architects of Cyberion City are 15 years old, or younger. The sheer bustle and intricacy of the land they have built is intimidating to the lone, over-educated immigrant trying to get somewhere, or build anything. As San Francisco Chronicle columnist Jon Carroll exclaimed on his first visit, "The psychological size of the place, all those rooms, and the 'puppets' flitting about, makes it seem like being dropped into downtown Tokyo with a Tootsie Roll and a screwdriver." To survive is the only task.
Kids get lost, then find their way, then they get lost in another sense and 
never leave. The continuous telecommunication traffic due to nonstop MUDing can cripple a computer center. The college of Amherst outlawed all MUDing from its campus. Australia, linked to the rest of the world by a limited number of precious satellite datalines, banned all international MUDs from the continent. Student-constructed virtual worlds were crowding out bank note updates and calls from Aunt Sheila. Other institutions are sure to follow the ban on unlimited virtual worlds. 
Until now, every MUD going (and there are about 200 of them) has been 
written by fanatical students in their spare time with no one's approval. A couple of pseudo-MUDs have a large following on commercial online services. These almost-MUDs, such as Federation 2, Gemstone, and ImagiNation's Yserbius permit multiusers but give them only limited power to alter their worlds. Xerox PARC is nurturing an experimental MUD running on its company computer. This trial, code-named the Jupiter Project, explores MUDs as a possible environment in which to run a business. An experimental Scandinavian system and a start-up called the Multiplayer Network (running a game called Kingdom of Drakkar) both boast a prototype visual MUD. The dawn of commercial profit-making MUDs in not far away.
Children of the 22nd century will marvel at Nintendo games of the 1990s 
and wonder why anyone bothered to play a simulation where only one person could enter. It's sort of like having one telephone in the world and no one to talk to.
The future of MUDs, then, converges upon the future of SIMNET, the future 
of SimCity, and the future of virtual reality. Somewhere in that mix is the ultimate god game. I imagine it as a vast world set into motion with a few well-chosen rules. It is populated by myriad autonomous critters and other creatures who are mere simulacra of distant human players. Characters unfold over time. Tangles grow. 
Eventually the simulated world quickens with palpable energy as the 
interrelations deepen and the entities alter and shape their world. The participants-real, fake, and hyperreal-coevolve the system into a game different than it began. Then, the god himself dons a pair of magic goggles, suits up, and descends into his creation.
The god who lowered himself into his own creation is an old theme. 
Stanislaw Lem once wrote a great science-fiction classic about a tyrant who kept his world in a box. But another version predates it by millennia.

As Moses tells the story, on the sixth day of creation, that is at the 
eleventh hour of a particularly frantic creative bout, the god kneaded some 
clayey earth and in an almost playful gesture, crafted a tiny model to dwell in his new world. This god, Yahweh, was an unspeakably mighty inventor who built his universe merely by thinking aloud. He had been able to do the rest of his creation in his head, but this part required some fiddling. The final hand-tuned model-a blinking, dazed thing, a "man" as Yahweh called him-was to be a bit more than the other creatures the almighty made that week. 
This one was to be a model in imitation of the great Yahweh himself. In 
some cybernetic way the man was to be a simulacra of Yahweh. 
As Yahweh was a creator, this model would also create in simulation of 
Yahweh's creativity. As Yahweh had free will and loved, this model was to have free will and love in reflection of Yahweh. So Yahweh endowed the model the same type of true creativity he himself possessed. 
Free will and creativity meant an open-ended world with no limits. Anything 
could be imagined, anything could be done. This meant that the man-thing could be creatively hateful as well as creatively loving (although Yahweh attempted to encode heuristics in the model to help it decide).
Now Yahweh himself was outside of time, beyond space and form, and 
unlimited in scope-ultimate software. So making a model of himself that could operate in bounded material, limited in scale, and constrained by time was not a cinch. By definition, the model wasn't perfect.
To continue where Moses left off, Yahweh's man-thing has been around in 
creation for millennia, long enough to pick up the patterns of birth, being, and becoming. A few bold man-things have had a recurring dream: to do as Yahweh did and make a model of themselves-a simulacra that will spring from their own hands and in its turn create novelty freely as Yahweh and man-things can. 
So by now some of Yahweh's creatures have begun to gather minerals from 
the earth to build their own model creatures. Like Yahweh, they have given their created model a name. But in the cursed babel of man-things, it has many designations: automata, robot, golem, droid, homunculus, simulacra.
The simulacra they have built so far vary. Some species, such as computer 
viruses, are more spirit than flesh. Others species of simulacra exist on another plane of being-virtual space. And some simulacra, like the kind marching forward in SIMNET, are terrifying hybrids between the real and the hyperreal.
The rest of the man-things are perplexed by the dream of the model 
builders. Some of the curious bystanders cheer: how wonderful to reenact Yahweh's incomparable creation! Others are worried; there goes our humanity. It's a good question. Will creating our own simulacra complete Yahweh's genesis in an act of true flattery? Or does it commence mankind's demise in the most foolish audacity? 
Is the work of the model-making-its-own-model a sacrament or a 
blasphemy?
One thing the man-creatures know for sure: making models of themselves is 
no cinch. 
The other thing the man-things should know is that their models won't be 
perfect, either. Nor will these imperfect creations be under godly control. To succeed at all in creating a creative creature, the creators have to turn over control to the created, just as Yahweh relinquished control to them. 
To be a god, at least to be a creative one, one must relinquish control and 
embrace uncertainty. Absolute control is absolutely boring. To birth the new, the unexpected, the truly novel-that is, to be genuinely surprised-one must surrender the seat of power to the mob below. 
The great irony of god games is that letting go is the only way to win.