POP GOES THE BIOSPHERE 
"I feel I am far out in space," said Roy Walford, one the people who lived 
inside Biosphere 2. Walford was speaking to a reporter via a video hookup 
during the first two-year closure of the ark, from September 26, 1991, to September 26, 1993. During that time eight humans, or biospherians as they are called, dramatically removed themselves from the direct touch of all other life on the planet, and from all the affirming flows of materials propelled by life, and lived instead in the tiny autonomous backwater swirl of life they had conjured up in a miniature surrogate Gaia. They could have been in space.
Walford was healthy but extremely skinny and underfed. For two years, all 
the biospherians were hungry. Their pocket-size farm had been plagued with insect infestations. Because they couldn't spray the beasties with poisons-since they would be drinking the evaporated runoff later in the week-they ate less. At one point the desperate biospherians crept down their rows of potato plants with portable hair dryers to drive the mites off the leaves, but without success. Altogether they lost five staple crops. One of the biospherians plummeted from 208 to 156 pounds. But he was prepared for this. He brought in clothes several sizes too small at the start. 
Some scientists felt starting the Bio2 project with humans inside was not the 
most productive way. Peter Warshall, their consulting naturalist, said, "As a scientist, I would have preferred that we closed the whole thing up for one year with only the first two or three kingdoms in it: unicellular organisms and below. We could have seen how much the microbial cosmos controls the atmosphere. Then later we'd put everything in, close it up for the next year and compare the fluctuations." A few scientists felt the troublesome and difficult-to-support species of Homo sapiens shouldn't be in there at all, and that the humans became a mere entertainment factor. But many were sure the ecological study was pointless compared to the practical goal of developing technologies of human survival away from the Earth. To review the conflicting views of the scientific import and agenda of the project, an independent Scientific Advisory Committee was commissioned by Bio2's financier Ed Bass. They issued a report in July 1992 which acknowledged the dual nature of the experiment. It stated:
The committee recognizes that there are at least two major areas of science to which Biosphere 2 can contribute significantly. One is the understanding of biogeochemical 
cycles of closed systems. From this perspective Biosphere 2 represents a much larger and more complex closed system than has ever been studied. For these studies the presence of human beings in the system is not essential except that they provide the capacity to make observations and measurements not initially regarded as important. The second is to gain the knowledge and experience to maintain humans within equilibrium in a closed ecological system. For these the presence of people is central to the experiment.
As an example of the latter case, within the first year people living inside the closed system yielded a completely unexpected medical result. Regular blood tests of the sequestered biospherians showed increased levels of pesticides and herbicides in their blood. Since every aspect of the environment within Bio2 was monitored constantly and precisely-it was the most monitored environment of all time-scientists knew that there were no pesticides or herbicides anywhere inside. One biospherian who had previously lived in third world countries had traces in her blood of a pesticide banned in the U.S. twenty years ago. What the medics guessed was that as the biospherians lost significant weight due to their restricted diet, they burnt up fat reserves stored in the past and flushed out toxins deposited in them decades ago. Until Bio2 was built, there was no scientific reason to precisely test people for internal toxins because there was no way to rigorously control what they ate, drank, breathed, or touched. Now there was. Just as Bio2 provided an experimental lab for meticulously tracking the flow of pollutants through an ecosystem, it also provided a lab for meticulously tracking the flow of pollutants through a human body.
Human bodies themselves are a vast complex system-despite our advanced 
medical knowledge, still unmapped-which can only be properly studied by isolating them from the greater complexity of life. Bio2 was an elegant way to do this. But the Science Advisory Committee missed another reason to have humans aboard, perhaps one of equal importance to getting ready for space. This justification was matter of control and scaffolding. Humans were to serve as the "thumb on the way to thought," the chaperone present at the introduction, but not needed past that. People were not necessary for a closed ecosystem to run once stable, but they might be helpful in stabilizing it. 
For instance, there was the practical matter of time. No scientist could afford 
to run the emerging ecosystem for years and let it crash whenever it wanted, only to have to start over. As long as the humans inside measured and recorded what they did, they could steer the closed system away from the precipices of disaster and still be scientific about it. Within great latitudes, the artificial ecosystem of Bio2 ran its own course, but when it veered toward a runaway state, or stalled, the biospherians nudged it. They shared control with the emergent system itself. They were copilots.One of the ways the biospherians shared control was by acting as "keystone 
predators"-biological checks of last resort. Populations of plants or animals that outran their niches were kept in reasonable range by human "arbitration." If the lavender shrub began to take over, the biospherians hacked it back. When the savanna grass shouldered out cactus, they weeded fiercely. In fact the Biospherians spent several hours per day weeding in the wilderness areas (not counting the weeding they did on their crop plots). Adey said, "You can build synthetic ecosystems as small as you want. But the smaller you make it, the greater role human operators play because they must act out the larger forces of nature beyond the ecological community. The subsidy we get from nature is incredible."
Again and again, this was the message from the naturalists who assembled 
Bio2: The subsidy we get from nature is incredible. The ecological subsidy most missing from Bio2 was turbulence. Sudden, unseasonable rainfall. Wind. Lightning. A big tree falling over. Unexpected events. Just as in a miniature Ecosphere, nature both mild and wild demands variance. Turbulence is crucial to recycle nutrients. The explosive imbalance of fire feeds a prairie or starts a forest. Peter Warshall said, "Everything is controlled in Bio2, but nature needs wildness, a bit of chaos. Turbulence is an expensive resource to generate artificially. But turbulence is also a mode of communication, how different species and niches inform each other. Turbulence, such as wave action, is also needed to maximize the productivity of a niche. And we ain't got any turbulence here."
Humans in Bio2 were the gods of turbulence and the deputies of chaos. As pilots responsible for co-controlling the ark, they paradoxically were also agents provocateurs responsible for staging a certain amount of out-of-controllness.
Warshall was in charge of creating the minisavanna within Bio2 and its 
miniturbulence. Savannas, said Warshall, have evolved in conditions of periodic disturbance and require a natural kick every now and then. Any savanna's plants need a jolt by being burnt to the ground by fire or grazed by antelope. He said, "The savanna is so adapted to disturbances that it can not sustain itself without it," and then joked about putting a sign in the Bio2 savanna that says "Please Disturb."
Turbulence is an essential catalyst in ecology, but it was not cheap to 
replicate in a man-made environment like Bio2. The wave machine that sloshed the lagoon water was complicated, noisy, expensive, endlessly breaking down, and after all that, only made tiny highly regular waves-minimal turbulence. Huge fans in the basement of Bio2 pushed the air around for some semblance of wind, but it hardly moved pollen. Pollen-moving wind would have been prohibitively expensive to manufacture. And fire would have smothered the humans with captive smoke."If we were really doing this right, we would be piping in thunder for the 
frogs, who are stimulated to reproduce by rain splatters and thunder," said Warshall. "But we are not really modeling the Earth, we are modeling Noah. In reality the question we are asking is, How many links can we break and still have a species survive?" 
"Well, we haven't had a crash yet!" Walter Adey chuckled. Both his analog 
coral reef in Bio2 and his analog swamp at the Smithsonian (which gets a thunderstorm when someone turns a gushing water hose onto it) thrived despite the sustained shock of being isolated and closed off from the big subsidies of nature. "They are hard to kill, given reasonable treatment. Or even occasional unreasonable treatment," Adey said. "One of my students forgot to remove a certain plug from the [Smithsonian] swamp one night, which flooded the main electrical panel with saltwater, which blew up the whole damn thing at 2 A.M. It wasn't until the next afternoon that we got its pumps running again, but it survived. We don't know how long we could have been down and still lived."

Life keeps rising. It rose again and again inside Bio2. The bottle was 
fecund, prolific. Of the many babies born in Bio2 during its first two years, 
the most visible was a galago born in the early months of closure. Two African pygmy goats birthed five kids, and an Ossabaw Island pig bore seven piglets. A checkered garter snake gave birth to three baby snakes in the ginger belt at the edge of the rain forest. And lizards hid lots of baby lizards under the rocks in the desert. 
But all the bumblebees died. And so did the hummingbirds, all four of them. One species of coral in the lagoon (out of forty) went "extinct," but it was represented by only a single individual. All the cordon bleu finches died, still in their transition cages; maybe they were too cold during an unusually cloudy Arizona winter. Linda Leigh, who was Bio2's in-house biologist, wondered ruefully whether, if she had let them out earlier, they could have discovered a warm corner on their own. Humans make such remorseful gods. Furthermore, fate is always ironic. Three uninvited English sparrows who snuck into the structure before closure thrived merrily. Leigh complained that the sparrows were brash and noisy, even vulgar in their pushiness, while the finches were elegant, peaceful, and melodious singers.
Stewart Brand once needled Linda on the phone: "What's the matter with you guys that you don't want to go with success? Keep the sparrows and forget about the finches." Brand urged Darwinism: find what works, and let it reproduce; let the biosphere tell you where it wants to go. Leigh confessed, "I was horrified when Stewart first said that, but more and more I agree with him." The problem was not just sparrows. It was 
aggressive passion vines in the artificial savanna, and savanna grasses in the desert, ants everywhere, and other creatures not invited.
Urbanization is the advent of edge species. The hallmark of the modern 
world is its fragmentation, its division into patchworks. What wilderness is left is divided into islands and the species that thrive best thrive on the betweenness of patches. Bio2 is a compact package of edges. It has more ecological edges per square foot than anywhere else on Earth. But there is no heartland, no dark deepness, which is increasingly true of most of Europe, much of Asia, and eastern North America. Edge species are opportunists: crows, pigeons, rats, and the weeds found on the borders of 
urban areas all over the world. 
Lynn Margulis, outspoken champion and coauthor of the Gaia Theory, told 
me her prediction of the Bio2 ecology before it closed. "It'll all go to Urban Weed," she said. Urban Weeds are those bully cosmopolitan varieties of both plants and animals that flourish in the edges of the patchwork habitats that people make. Bio2, after all, was a patchwork wilderness par excellence. According to Margulis's hypothesis, one expected to open the doors of Bio2 at the end and find it filled with dandelions, sparrows, cockroaches, and raccoons. 
The human role was to prevent that from happening. Leigh said, "If we 
didn't tamper with it-that is, if no humans weeded the ones that were highly successful-I agree that Bio2 could go towards what Lynn Margulis is talking about: a world of Bermuda grass and mallard ducks. But since we are doing selective harvesting, I don't think that will happen, at least in the short run."
I harbor personal doubts about the ability of biospherians to steer the 
emergent ecology of 3,800 species. In the first two years, the fog desert became a fog thicket-it was wetter than expected, and grasses loved it. Weedy morning-glory vines overran the rainforest canopy. The 3,800 species will sidestep, outmaneuver, burrow under, and otherwise wear down the "keystone predator" the biospherians hope to be, in order to go where they want to go. The cosmopolitan types are tenacious. They are in their element, and they want to stay.
Witness the curved-bill thrasher. One day an official from the U.S. Fish and 
Wildlife Department showed up outside a Bio2 window. The death of the finches had made the TV news and animal-rights activists had been calling his office. They wanted his service to check if the finches inside Bio2 had been collected from wild exotic places and brought in there to die. The biospherians showed the officer receipts and other paperwork that proved the late finches were mere captive-bred store pets, a status that was okay with the Wildlife Department. "By the way, what other birds do you have in there?" he asked them.
"Right now, only some English sparrows and a curved-bill thrasher."
"Do you have a permit for that curved-bill thrasher?""Uhhh, no."
"You know that under the Migratory Bird Treaty it's against federal law to 
contain a curved-bill thrasher. I'll have to give you a citation if you are holding him deliberately.""Deliberately? You don't understand. He's a stowaway. We tried very hard to 
get him out of here. We tried trapping him every way we could think of. We didn't want him here before and we don't want him here now. He eats our bees, and butterflies, and as many insects as he can find, which isn't many by now."
The game warden and the biospherians were facing each other on either 
side of a thick airtight window. Although their noses were inches apart they talked on walkie-talkies. The surreal conversation continued. "Look," the biospherians said, "we couldn't get him out now even if we could catch him. We are completely sealed up in here for another year and a half."
"Oh. Umm. I see." The warden pauses. "Well, since you aren't keeping him 
intentionally, I'll issue you a permit for a curved-bill thrasher, and you can release him when you open up."
Anyone want to bet he won't ever leave?Go with success. Unlike the fragile finches, both the hearty sparrows and the 
stubborn thrasher liked Bio2. The thrasher had his charms. His beautiful song wove through the wilderness in the morning and cheered the "key predators" during their sunrise routines.
The messy living thing knitting itself together inside Bio2 was pushing back. 
It was a coevolutionary world. The biospherians would have to coevolve along with it. Bio2 was specifically built to test how a closed system coevolves. In a coevolutionary world, the atmosphere and material environment in which beasties dwell become as adaptable and as lifelike as the beasties themselves. Bio2 was a test bench to find out how an environment governs the organisms immersed in it, and how the organisms in turn govern the environment. The atmosphere is the paramount environmental factor; it produces life, while life produces it. The transparent bottle of Bio2 turned out to be the ideal seat from which to observe an atmosphere in the act of conversing with life.

Inside this ultratight world -hundreds of times more airtight than any 
NASA space capsule-the atmosphere was full of surprises. It was 
unexpectedly clean for one thing. The trace gas buildup that was such a horrendous problem for earlier closed habitats and hi-tech closed systems such as NASA's space shuttle was eliminated by the collective respiration of a wilderness area. Scrubbed by some unknown balancing mechanism-most probably microbial-the air inside Bio2 was far cleaner than any space journey so far. Mark Nelson says, "Someone figured out it costs about $100 million a year to keep an astronaut in space, yet those guys are living in the worst environmental conditions you can imagine, worse than a ghetto." Mark told of an acquaintance who was honored to greet the returning space shuttle astronauts. She was nervously waiting in front of cameras as they readied the door. They opened the hatch. She got a whiff. She puked. Mark says, "These guys really are heroes, because they are living a lousy life." 
For two years in Bio2, carbon dioxide levels meandered up and down. At one 
point during a six-day sunless period, CO2 reached a high of 3,800 parts per million (ppm). To give a sense of where that fits in, ambient carbon dioxide levels outside normally hover steadily at 350 ppm. The interior of a modern office building on a busy street may reach 2,000 ppm, and submarines let their CO2 concentration rise to 8,000 ppm before they turn on CO2 "scrubbers." Crew members of the NASA space shuttle work in a "normal" atmosphere of 5,000 ppm. Compare that to a very respectable 1,000 ppm average during a spring day in Bio2. The fluctuations, then, are well within the range of ordinary urban life and hardly noticeable to humans.
But the dance of atmospheric CO2 does have consequences on plants and 
the ocean. During the tense days of higher CO2, the biospherians worried that increased CO2 in their air would dissolve in the mild ocean water, increasing the formation of carbonic acid (CO2 + water), and lowering the water's pH, harming the newly transplanted corals. Discerning further biological effects of increased CO2 is part of the Biosphere 2 mission.
People pay attention to the makeup of the Earth's atmosphere because it 
seems to be changing. We are sure it is changing, but beyond that we know almost nothing about its behavior. The only measurement of any historical accuracy we have relates to one component: carbon dioxide. The information on CO2 concentration in the Earth's atmosphere shows an accelerating global rise over the past thirty years; that graph is due to a 
single, persistent scientist: Charles Keeling. In 1955, Keeling devised an instrument that could measure concentrations of carbon dioxide in all kinds of environments, from sooty city rooftops to pristine wilderness forests. Keeling obsessively measured CO2 anywhere he thought the level might vary. He measured CO2 at all times of the day and night. He initiated continuous measurements of CO2 on a Hawaiian mountaintop and in the Antarctic. A colleague of Keeling told a reporter, "Keeling's outstanding characteristic is that he has an overwhelming desire to measure carbon dioxide. He wants to measure it in his belly. Measure it in all its manifestations, atmospheric and oceanic. And he's done this all his life." Keeling is still measuring carbon dioxide around the world.
Keeling discovered very early that CO2 in the Earth's atmosphere cycles 
daily. CO2 in the air increases measurably at night when plants shut down photosynthesis for the day, and then hits a low in the sunny afternoon as the plants go full steam turning CO2 into vegetables. A few years later Keeling observed a second cycle: a hemispherical seasonal cycle of CO2, low in summer and peaking in the winter for the same reason CO2 peaks at night: no greens at work to eat it. But it is the third trend Keeling discovered that has focused attention on the dynamics of the atmosphere. Keeling noticed that the lowest level of CO2, no matter where or when, would never sink beyond 315 ppm. This threshold was the ambient, global CO2 level. And he noticed that every year it rose a little higher. By now, it's 350 ppm. Recently, other researchers have spotted in Keeling's meticulous recordings a fourth trend: the seasonal cycle is increasing in amplitude. It is as if the planet breathes yearly, summer (inhale) to winter (exhale), and its breath is getting deeper and deeper. Is Gaia hyperventilating or gasping?
Bio2 is a miniature Gaia. It is a small self-enclosed world with its own 
miniature atmosphere derived from living creatures. It is the first whole atmosphere/biosphere laboratory. And it has a chance to answer some of the tremendous questions science has about the workings of the Earth's atmosphere. Humans are inside the test tube to prevent the experiment from crashing, to divert the trials from overt crisis. The rest of us humans are outside, but inside the test tube of planet Earth. We are fiddling with Earth's atmosphere, yet haven't the slightest idea of how to control it, or where the dials are, or even if the system really is out of kilter and in crisis. The Bio2 experiment can offer clues to all those questions.
The atmosphere of Bio2 is so sensitive that the CO2 needle rises when a 
cloud passes over. The shade momentarily slows green manufacturing, which momentarily lets the input flow of CO2 back up, which immediately registers as a blip at the CO2 meter. On a partly cloudy day Bio2's CO2 graph shows a string of little atmospheric hiccups.
Despite all the attention CO2 levels have garnered in the past decade, and 
despite all the scrutiny agriculturists have given to the carbon cycle in plants, the fate of carbon in the Earth's atmosphere is a puzzle. It is generally agreed by climatologists that the curve of increasing CO2 within 
modern times very roughly matches the rates of carbon-burning by industrial humans. That neat fit leaves out one astounding factor: when measured more precisely, only half of the carbon now burned on Earth remains in the atmosphere as increased CO2 levels. The other half disappears!
Theories for the lost carbon abound. Three theories dominate: (1) it is being 
dissolved in the ocean, and then it precipitates to the sea bottom as carbon rain; or (2) it is being deposited in soils by microbes; or (3), most controversial, the lost carbon is fueling growth of the world's savanna grass, or being turned into tree wood, on an imperceptible but massive scale that we haven't yet been able to measure. CO2 is the accepted limiting resource for the biosphere. At 350 ppm, the concentration of carbon dioxide is only a faint .03 percent-a mere trace gas. A field of corn in full sunshine will deplete the available trace CO2 within a zone three feet above ground in under five minutes. Even small increases in CO2 levels can boost biomass production significantly. Accordingly, says this hypothesis, wherever we aren't cutting down forests, trees are putting on extra weight due to the 15 percent of additional CO2 "fertilizer" in the air, perhaps even at a rate greater than they are being destroyed elsewhere.
So far, the evidence is confusing. But in April of 1992, two studies published 
in Science claimed that the ocean and biosphere of Earth are indeed stockpiling carbon at the scale needed. One article showed that European forests have gained 25 percent or more treeflesh since 1971-despite the negative effects of acid rain and other pollutants. But hardly anyone has looked at the global carbon budget in detail. Our global ignorance of the global atmosphere makes the Biosphere experiment very promising. Here in the relatively controlled conditions of a sealed bottle, the links between an operating atmosphere and a living biosphere can be explored and mapped.
The amounts of carbon in the atmosphere, in the soil, in the plants, and in 
the ocean of Bio2 were carefully measured before closure. As the sun heated up photosynthesis, the carbon was moved from air to living things by measurable amounts. Each time any plant material was harvested, it was laboriously weighed and recorded by the biospherians. They could perturb the system slightly to see how it changed. For instance, when Linda Leigh "turned on the savanna" with artificial summer rains, the biospherians made simultaneous measurements of carbon levels in all domains of subsoil, topsoil, air, and water. They compiled a rich chart of where all carbon lies at the end of two years. By saving dried samples of leaf clippings, they also traced (somewhat) the route that carbon traveled within the surrogate world by following shifts in the ratio of naturally occurring carbon isotopes.
Carbon was only the first mystery. But the riddle deepened. Oxygen levels 
were lower inside Bio2 than outside. Oxygen dropped from 21 percent of the Bio2 atmosphere to 15 percent. A 6 percent drop in oxygen concentration was equivalent to Bio2 being transported to a site at a higher elevation, with a thinner atmosphere. The residents of Lhasa, Tibet, thrive at a similar, 
slightly reduced oxygen level. The biospherians experienced headaches, sleep loss, and fatigue. Though not catastrophic, the drop in oxygen levels was bewildering. In a sealed bottle, where does disappearing oxygen go?
Unlike the lost-carbon riddle, the mysterious oxygen vanishing act in Bio2 
was completely unexpected. Speculation was that oxygen in Bio2 was tied up in the newly minted soil, maybe being captured into carbonates formed by microorganisms. Or, perhaps the fresh concrete absorbed it. In a quick survey of the scientific literature, biospheric researchers found little data concerning atmospheric oxygen levels in the Earth's atmosphere. The only known (but little-reported) fact is that oxygen in the atmosphere of the Earth is most likely also disappearing! Nobody knows why or even by how much. "I am surprised that the general public all over the world is not clamoring to know how fast we are using up the oxygen," said visionary physicist Freeman Dyson, one of the few scientists to even raise the problem.
And why stop there? Several experts watching the Bio2 experiment have 
suggested that tracing the comings and goings of atmospheric nitrogen should be next. Although nitrogen is the bulk component of the atmosphere, its role in the Great Cycle is known only broadly. Like carbon and oxygen, what is known has been extrapolated from reductionist experiments in the lab and computer modeling. Others have proposed that the biospherians map the element sodium or phosphorus next. Generating big questions about Gaia and the atmosphere may be Bio2's most important contribution to science. 
When the CO2 levels first began to rocket inside, the biospherians launched 
a countermove to limit the CO2 rise. The chief tool to leverage the atmosphere was deployment of an "intentional season." Take a dry, dormant savanna, desert or thorn scrub and rouse it into spring with rising temperatures. Soon a thousand leaf buds swell. Then pour on the rain. Bam! In four days the plants explode into leaf and flower. The awakened biome sucks up CO2. Once up, the biome can be kept awake past its normal retiring time by pruning old growth to stimulate new CO2-consuming growth. As Leigh wrote in late fall of the first year, "With short days of winter approaching, we have to prepare for reduced light. Today we began to prune back the ginger belt on the north edge of the rain forest in order to stimulate rapid growth-a routine atmosphere management task."
The humans managed the atmosphere by turning the "CO2 valve." 
Sometimes they reversed it. To flood the air with carbon dioxide, the biospherians hauled back the tons of dried grass clippings they had removed earlier. The clippings were piled on the soil as mulch and wetted. As bacteria decomposed it, they released CO2 into the air.
Leigh called the biospherian interference in the atmosphere a "molecule 
economy." When they coordinated the atmosphere, they would "deposit the carbon into our account for safekeeping so that we can spend it next 
summer when we will need it for long days of plant growth." The underground areas where the plant clippings were dried served as a carbon bank. Carbon was lent as needed and primed with water. Water in Bio2 was diverted from one locality to another like so much federal spending meant to stimulate a regional economy. By channeling water onto the desert, CO2 shrank; by channeling the water onto the dried mulch, CO2 expanded. On Earth, our carbon bank is the black oil under Arabian sands, but all we do is spend it. 
Bio2 compressed geological time into years. The biospherians twiddled with 
"geological" adjustments of carbon-storing and withdrawing carbon atoms in bulk-in the hope of roughly tuning the atmosphere. They tinkered with the ocean, lowering its temperature, adjusting the return of salty leachate, nudging its pH, and simultaneously guessing on a thousand other variables. "It's those few thousand other variables that make the Bio2 system challenging and controversial," said Leigh. "Most of us are taught not to mess with even two simultaneous variables." The biospherians hoped that if they were lucky, they could temper the initial wild oscillations of the atmosphere and ocean in the first years with a few well-chosen drastic actions. They would be the training wheels until the system could cycle through the year relying only on the natural action of sun, seasons, plants and animals to keep it in balance. At that point the system would "pop."
"Pop" is the term hobbyists in the saltwater aquarium trade use to describe 
what happens when a new fish tank suddenly balances after a long, meandering period of instability. Like Bio2, a saltwater fish tank is a delicate closed system that relies on an invisible world of microorganisms to process the waste of larger animals and plants. As Gomez, Folsome, and Pimm discovered in their microcosms, it can take 60 days for the microbes to settle into a stable community. In aquariums it takes several months for the various bacteria to develop a food web and to establish themselves in the gravel of the start-up tank. As more species of life are slowly added to the embryonic aquarium, the water becomes extremely sensitive to vicious cycles. If one ingredient drifts out of line (say, the amount of ammonia), it can kill off a few organisms, which decompose to release even more ammonia, killing more creatures, thus rapidly triggering the crash of the whole community. To ease the tank through this period of acute imbalance, the aquarist nudges the system gently with judicious changes of water, select chemical additives, filtration devices, and inoculations of bacteria from other successful aquariums. Then after about six weeks of microbial give-and-take-the nascent community teetering on the edge of chaos-suddenly, overnight, the system "pops" to zero ammonia. It's now ready for the long haul. Once the system has popped, it is more self-sustaining, self-stabilizing, not requiring the artificial crutches that set-up needed.
What is interesting about a closed-system pop is that the conditions the day 
before the pop and the day after the pop hardly change. Beyond a little babysitting, there is often nothing one can do except wait. Wait for the thing to mature, to ripen, to grow, and develop. "Don't rush it," is the advice from 
saltwater hobbyists. "Don't hurry gestation as the system self-organizes. The most important thing you can give it is time."
Still green after two years, Bio2 is ripening. It suffers from wild, infantile 
oscillations that require "artificial" nurturing to soothe. It has not popped yet. It may be years (decades?) before it does, if it ever does, if it even can. That is the experiment.
We have not really looked yet, but we may find that all complex 
coevolutionary systems need to pop. Ecosystem restorationists such as Packard on the prairie and Wingate on Nonsuch Island seem to find that large systems can be assembled by ratchetting up complexity; once a system reaches a level of stability it tends not to easily fall back again, as if the system was "attracted" by the cohesion birthed by the new complexity. Human institutions, such as teams and companies, exhibit pop. Some little nudge-the additional right manager, a nifty new tool-can suddenly turn 35 competent hard-working people into a creative organism in the state of runaway success. Machines and machine systems, once we build them with sufficient complexity and flexibility, will also pop. 

Directly beneath the wilderness of savanna and forest, the farm, and the 
modern apartments of the biospherians, lies the other face of Bio2: the 
mechanical "technosphere." The technosphere is the scaffolding put in place to help Bio2 pop. At several places in the wilderness, stairs wind down to a cavernous basement stuffed with basementish fixtures. Fifty miles of color-coded pipes as thick as an arm wind along the wall. There are huge ductworks right out of the movie Brazil; miles and miles of electrical wiring; workshops full of heavy-duty tools; hallways crowded with threshing and milling machines; shelves of spare parts; switchboxes, dials, vacuum blowers; over 200 motors, 100 pumps, and 60 fans. It could be the inside of a submarine or the backside of skyscraper. The territory is industrial grunge.
The technosphere supports the biosphere. Huge blowers circulate the entire 
air of Bio2 several times in one day. Heavy pumps move the rainwater. The motors of the wave machine run day and night. Machines hum. This unabashedly manufactured world is not outside Bio2 but inside its tissue, like bone or cartilage, an integral part of the greater organism. 
For example, Bio2's coral reef would not have worked without an eerie 
backroom in the basement where the algae scrubbers hide. The scrubbers were table-wide shallow plastic trays filled with a pool of algae. The whole room was flooded with the same type of halide sunlamps as illuminated artificial coral reefs in museums. The scrubbers were in fact the mechanical kidneys of the Bio2 coral reef. They performed the same function as a pool filter: to clear the water. The algae consumed waste products from the reef and under the intense artificial sunlight they proliferated in stringy green mats. The green strands soon clogged the scrubber; and just like a pool or aquarium filter, the scrubber needed to be scraped clean every ten days by some poor schmuck-another job for the eight humans. Cleaning the algae scrubbers (the harvest became compost) was the most despised assignment in Bio2.
The nerve center of the whole system was the computer room run by an 
artificial cortex of wires, chips, and sensors from around Bio2. Every valve, every pipe, and every motor of the infrastructure was simulated in a software network. Very little activity in the ark, either natural or man-made, happened without the distributed computer knowing about it. Bio2 responded as if it was one beast. About a hundred chemical compounds were continuously measured in the air, soil, and water throughout the whole 
structure. A potential profit-making technology that SBV imagined spinning off the project was sophisticated environmental-monitoring techniques.
Mark Nelson got it right when he said that Bio2 was the "marriage of ecology 
and technics." That's the beauty of Bio2-it's a fine example of ecotech, the symbiosis of nature and technology. We don't know enough yet how to invent biomes without installing pumps. But by using the scaffolding of pumps now, we can try the system out and learn.
To a large degree it's a matter of learning a new form of control. Tony 
Burgess said, "NASA goes about by optimizing resource utilization. They take wheat and optimize the environment for the production of wheat. But the problem is when you put together a whole bunch of species you can't optimize each species separately, you have to optimize the whole thing. Doing this one at a time you become dependent on governance by engineering. SBV hopes that you can remove governance by engineering and switch it to governance by biology. Which ultimately should be cheaper. You may lose some optimization of production, but you gain independence from the technics."
Bio2 is a gigantic flask for ecological experiments that require more control 
over the environment than could (or should) be done in the wild. Individual lives can be studied in a laboratory. But ecological life and biospheric life require a more monumental room to view things in. For instance, in Bio2 a single species can be introduced or deleted with great confidence knowing that no other species have been altered-all in a space large enough for something "ecological" to happen. "Biosphere 2," said John Allen, "is a cyclotron for the life sciences."
Or maybe Bio2 is really a better Noah's ark. A futuristic zoo within one large 
cage where everything runs wild, including the observing Homo sapiens. The species are free be themselves and to coevolve with others into anything they want.
At the same time, space cowboys see Bio2 as a pragmatic step on a spiritual 
journey off the planet into the galaxies. As space technology, Bio2 is the most thrilling news since the moon landings. NASA, after routinely pooh-poohing the enterprise in its conceptual stages, refusing to help out at any time, has had to swallow their pride and acknowledge that, yes, there is something useful here. Out-of-control biology has a place.
All three spirits are really manifestations of the same metamorphosis best 
described by Dorion Sagan in his book Biospheres: 
The "man-made" ecosystems known as biospheres are ultimately "natural"-a planetary phenomenon that is part of the reproductive antics of life as a whole....We are at the first phase of a planetary metamorphosis,...[the] reappearance of 
individuality at a hitherto unsuspected scale: not of reproducing microorganisms, or plants or animals, but of the Earth as a living whole ...
Yes, humans beings are involved in this reproduction, but are 
not insects involved in the reproduction of many flowers? That the living Earth now depends upon us and our engineering technology for its reproduction does not invalidate the proposition that biospheres, ostensibly built for human beings, represent the reproduction of the planetary biosystem....
What is definitive success? Eight people living inside it for two 
years? How about ten years, or a century? In fact, biosphere reproduction, the building of dwellings that internally recycle all that is needed for human life, begins something whose end we cannot foresee.
When everything works, and free time loosens up daydreams, the biospherians can wonder, Where does all this lead? What's next? A Bio2 oasis at the South Pole? Or a bigger Bio2 with many more bugs and birds and berries? The most interesting question may be: how small can a Bio2 be? Those master miniaturists, the Japanese, are crazy over Biosphere 2. In one poll conducted in Japan, over 50 percent of the population recognized the project. To those used to claustrophobic living quarters and the isolation of island living, a mini-Bio2 seems positively charming. In fact, one government department in Japan has announced plans for a Biosphere J. The "J" stands not for Japan (they say), but for Junior, as in tinier. Official sketches show a small warren of rooms, lit by artificial lights and stuffed with compact biological systems.
The ecotechnicians who built Bio2 have figured out the basic techniques. 
They know how to seal the glass, schedule perpetual subsistence crops in a very small plot, recycle their wastes, balance their atmosphere, live without paper, and get along inside. That's a pretty good start for biospheres of any size. The future should birth Bio2s in all sizes and varieties, housing every combination of species. As Mark Nelson told me, "In the future there will be an enormous proliferation of niches for biospheres." Indeed, he sees varieties of biospheres of different sizes and composition, as if they were different species of biospheres, competing over territory, mingling to share genes, and hybridizing in the manner of biological organisms. Planets would be settled with them, and every city on Earth would have one, for experiments and education.
continue...   
 
Out of Control
One evening in the spring of 1991, by some bureaucratic oversight, I found 
myself without an escort in the nearly completed Biosphere. The 
construction guys had gone home for the day, and the SBV staff were turning out lights up on the hill. I was alone in the first offspring of Gaia. It was eerily quiet. I felt I was standing in a cathedral. Loitering in the agricultural biome, I could barely hear the muffled thump of the distant wave machine in the ocean, as it exhaled a wave every twelve seconds. Near the machine-which sucks up ocean water and then releases it in a wave-it sounded, as Linda Leigh says, like the blow of a gray whale. Back in the garden where I stood, the distant deep guttural moan sounded like Tibetan monks chanting in the basement.
Outside, brown desert at dusk. Inside, a world thick with green life. Tall 
grass, seaweed adrift in tubs, ripe papaya, the splash of a fish jumping. I was breathing green, that heavy plant smell you get in jungles and swamps. The atmosphere moved slowly. Water cycled. The space-frame structure creaked as it cooled. The oasis was alive, yet everything was still. Quietly busy. No people. But something was happening together; I could sense the "co" in coevolutionary life. 
The sun had nearly set. Its light was soft and warm on the white cathedral. I 
could live here a bit, I thought. There's a sense of place. A cave coziness. Yet open to the stars at night. A womb with a view. Mark Nelson said, "If we are really going to live in space like human beings, then we have to learn how to make biospheres." He said that the first thing macho, no-time-for-nonsense cosmonauts did after floating out of bed in the Soviet skylab was to tend their tiny pea seedling "experiments." Their kinship with peas became evident to them. We need other life.
On Mars, I would only want to live in an artificial biosphere. On Earth, living 
in an artificial biosphere is a noble experiment, suitable for pioneers. I could imagine it coming to feel like living inside a giant test tube after awhile. Great things will be learned inside Bio2 about our Earth, ourselves, and the uncountable other species we depend on. I have no doubt that someday what is learned here will land on Mars or the Moon. Already it has taught me, an outsider, that to live as human beings means to live with other life. The nauseating fear that machine technology will replace all living species has subsided in my mind. We'll keep other species, I believe, because as Bio2 helps prove, life is a technology. Life is the ultimate technology. 
Machine technology is a temporary surrogate for life technology. As we improve our machines they will become more organic, more biological, more like life, because life is the best technology for living. Someday the bulk of the technosphere in Bio2 will be replaced by engineered life and lifelike systems. Someday the difference between machines and biology will be hard to discern. Yet "pure" life will still have its place. What we know as life today will remain the ultimate technology because of its autonomy-it goes by itself, and more importantly, it learns by itself. Ultimate technologies, of any sort, inevitably win the allegiance of engineers, corporations, bankers, visionaries, and pioneers-all the agents who once were thought of as pure life's biggest threat.
The glass spaceship parked in the desert is called a biosphere because the 
logic of the Bios runs through it. The logic of Bios (bio-logic, biology) is uniting the organic and the mechanical. In the factories of bioengineering firms and in the chips of neural-net computers, the organic and the machine are merging. But nowhere is that marriage between the living and the manufactured so clear as in the pod of the Bio2. Where does the synthetic coral reef end and the chanting wave machine begin? Where does the waste-treatment marsh begin and the toilet plumbing end? Is it the fans or the soil bugs that control the atmosphere?
The bounty of a journey inside Bio2 is mostly questions. I sailed in it for only 
hours and got years of things to consider. That's enough. I turned the massive handle on the air lock doors in the quiet Biosphere 2 and debarked into a twilight desert. Two years in there would fill a lifetime.