INDUSTRIAL ECOLOGY 
Barcelona, Spain is a city of die-hard optimists. Its citizens embrace not 
only trade and industry, art and opera, but also the Future, with a capital F. 
Twice, in 1888 and 1929, Barcelona hosted the Universal Exhibition, the then equivalent of a world's fair. Barcelona eagerly courted this future-friendly fiesta because, in one Spanish writer's opinion, the city "...really has no reason to be...so [it] is constantly re-inventing itself by creating great prospects." Barcelona's 1992 self-made great prospect was an Olympic vision, with a capital O. Young athletes, mass culture, new technology, big bucks-quite appealing prospects to this square town bustling with commonsense design and an earnest mercantile spirit. 
Smack in the middle of this pragmatic place, the legendary Antonio Gaudi 
built several dozen of the strangest buildings on Earth. His structures are so futuristic and weird that Barcelonians and the world didn't know what to make of them until recently. His most famous creation is the unfinished cathedral known as the Sagrada Familia. Begun in 1884, the parts of the cathedral completed in Gaudi's time seethe with organic energy. The facade of stone drips, arcs, and blossoms as if it were vegetable. Four soaring steeples are honeycombed with cavities, revealing them to be the bony skeleton of support they are. One-third of the way up a second set of towers in the rear, massive thighbone braces lean up from the ground and steady the church. From a distance the braces look to be giant bleached drumsticks of a creature long dead.
All of Gaudi's work squirms with the flow of life. Ventilator chimneys 
sprouting on the roofs of his Barcelona apartments resemble a collection of mounted life forms from an alien planet. Window eaves and roof gutters curve in organic efficiency rather than follow a mechanical right angle. Gaudi captures that peculiar living response which cuts across a square campus lawn and traces a graceful curving shortcut. His buildings seem to be grown rather than constructed.
Imagine an entire city of Gaudi buildings, a human-made forest of planted 
homes and organic churches. Imagine if Gaudi did not have to stop with the static face of a stone veneer, but could endow his building with organic behavior over time. His building would thicken its hide on the side where the wind blows most or rearrange its interior as its inhabitants shifted their use of it. Imagine if Gaudi's city not only stood by organic design but adapted and flexed and evolved as living creatures do, forming an ecology of 
buildings. This is a future vision that not even optimistic Barcelona is ready for. But it is a future that is arriving now with the advent of adaptive technologies, distributed networks, and synthetic evolution.
You can browse through old Popular Science magazines from the early '60s 
and see that a living house has been in speculation for decades, not counting wonderful science-fiction stories even earlier. The animated Jetsons live in such a home, talking to it as if it were an animal or person. I think the metaphor is close but not quite correct. The adaptive house of the future will be more like an ecology of organisms than a single being, more like a jungle than a dog. 
The ingredients for an ecological house are visible in an ordinary 
contemporary house. I can already program my home's thermostat to automatically run our furnace at different temperatures during weekdays and weekends. In essence, fire is networked to a clock. Our VCR knows how to tell time and talk to the TV. As computers continue to collapse into mere dots which find themselves wired into all appliances, it is reasonable to expect our washing machine, stereo, and smoke alarm to communicate in a householdwide network. Someday soon, when a visitor rings the doorbell, the doorbell will turn down the vacuum cleaner so that we can hear its chime. When the clothes are done in the washer, it will flash a message on the TV to let us know it's ready for the dryer. Even furniture will become part of the living forest. A microchip in a couch will sense the presence of a sitter and turn the heat up in the room.
The vehicle for this house-net, as it is presently envisioned by engineers in 
several research labs, is a universal outlet peppering the rooms in every home. You plug everything into it. Your telephone, computer, doorbell, furnace, and vacuum cleaner all insert into the same outlet to get both power and information. These smart outlets dispense 110-volt juice only to "qualified" appliances and only when they request it. When you plug a smart object into the house-net, its chip declares its identity ("I am a toaster"), status ("I am turned on"), and need ("Give me 10 watts of 110"). A child's fork or broken cord won't get power. 
Outlets trade information all the time, powering-up things when needed. 
Most importantly, the networked outlets bundle many wires into one socket, so that intelligence, energy, information, and communication can be sucked from any point. You plug a doorbell button in a socket near the front door; you can then plug a doorbell chime into any socket in any room. Plug in a stereo in one room, and music is ready in all the other rooms as well. Likewise, the clock. Soon universal time signals will be transmitted through all power and telephone lines. Once something is plugged in anywhere, it will at least know the time and date and automatically recalibrate daylight savings when instructed by the master timekeeper in Greenwich, England or the U.S. Naval Observatory. All information plugged into the household net will also be shared. The furnace's thermostat can feed a room's temperature to any appliance that would like to know, say, a fire alarm or a ceiling fan. 
Anything that can be measured--level of light, motion of inhabitants, noise level-can be broadcast into the home's network.
An intelligently wired house would be a lifesaver to the disabled and elderly. 
From a switch near the bed, they could control the lights, TV, and security gizmos in the rest of the house. An ecological building would also be moderately more energy efficient. Says Ian Allaby, a journalist reporting on the dawning smart-house trade, "You might not want to climb from bed to run the dishwasher at 2 A.M. to save 15 cents, but if you could pre-arrange the utility to switch the machine on for you, then great!" The prospect of decentralized efficiency is attractive to utility companies, since the profits in efficiency are greater than those in building a new power plant.
So far, nobody actually lives in a smart house. A grand partnership of 
electronic firms, building industry associations, and telephone companies banded together in 1984 under the umbrella of Smart House Partnership to develop protocols and hardware for an intelligent house. As of late 1992 the group had built about a dozen demo homes to distract reporters and garner investments. The partnership dropped their initial 1984 vision of a standard one-size-fits-all outlet as too radical on first pass. For interim technology, Smart House uses wiring that divides functions into three cables and three connections at the outlet box (AC power, DC power, and communications). This would allow "backward compatibility"-the opportunity to plug dumb ol' power tools and appliances into the house without having to scrap them for new smart objects. Competing agencies in the U.S., Japan, and Europe play with other ideas and other standards, including using a wireless infrared network to connect widgets. This would enable portable battery-powered devices, or nonelectric objects to be linked into the web. Doors could have small semi-intelligent chips that "plug in" via invisible signals in the air, to let the household ecology know that a room was closed or that a visitor was coming down the hall.

My prediction in 1994: Smart offices will materialize before smart homes. 
Because of the intensive informational nature of business-its reliance on 
machines and its need to constantly adapt-wizardry that is merely marginal in a home can make an economic difference in an office. Time at home is often regarded as leisure, so saving a bit through the intelligence of a net isn't as valuable as accumulating small amounts of time on the job. Networked computers and phones are mandatory in offices now; networked lights and furniture will be next.
The research labs of Xerox in Palo Alto, California (PARC), invented, but 
unfortunately never exploited, the signature elements of the first friendly Macintosh computers. Not to be burned twice, PARC intends to fully exploit yet another radical (and potentially profitable) concept brewing in their labs now. Mark Weiser, young and cheerful, is director of a Xerox initiative to view the office as a superorganism-a networked being composed of many interlinked parts. 
The glassy offices of PARC perch on a Bay Area hill overlooking Silicon 
Valley. When I visit Weiser he is wearing a loud yellow shirt flanked by red suspenders. He smiles constantly, as if inventing the future was a big joke and I'm in on it. I take the couch, an obligatory furnishing in hacker dens, even posh hacker dens like these at Xerox. Weiser is too animated to sit; he's waving his arms-a marker in one hand-in front of a huge white board that runs from the floor to the ceiling. This is complicated, his arms say, you are going to need to see it. The picture Weiser begins drawing on the white board looks like a diagram of a Roman army. Down at the bottom are one hundred small units. Above it are ten medium-size units. Perched at the top level is one large unit. The army that Weiser is drawing is a field of Room Organisms.
What I really want, Weiser is telling me, is an mob of tiny smart objects. 
One hundred small things throughout my office that have a uniform, dim awareness of each other, of themselves, and of me. My room becomes a supercolony of quasi-smart bits. What you want, he says, is every book on your shelf to have a chip embedded in it so that it keeps track of where it is in the room, when it was last open, and to what page. The chip might even have a dynamic copy of the book's index that will link itself to your computer database when you first bring the book into the room. The book now has a community presence. All information stored on a shelf as, say, books or 
videotapes are implanted with a cheap chip to communicate both where they are and what they are about. 
In the ecological office stocked with swarmish things, the room will know 
where I am. If I'm not there, obviously it (they?) should turn the lights off. Weiser: "Instead of having a light switch in every room, everyone carries their own light switch with them. When they want the lights on, the smart switch in their pocket turns them on or dims them to a level you want, in the room you happen to be in. Rather than the room having a dimmer, you have a dimmer. Personal light control. Same with volume control. In an auditorium everyone has their personal volume control. The volume is often too loud or too low, so everyone sort of votes with their pocket devices. The sound settles at an average for those people."
In Weiser's vision of an intelligent office, ubiquitous smart things form a 
hierarchy. At bottom, an army of microorganisms act as a background sensory net for the room. They feed location and usage information directly to the upper levels. These frontline soldiers are cheap, disposable small fry attached to writing pads, booklets, and smart Post-it notes. You buy them by the dozen-like pads of paper or RAM chips. They work best massed into a mob.
Next, about ten mid-size (slightly bigger than a bread box) displays, such as 
furniture and appliances interact more frequently and directly with the office holder. Linked into the superorganism of a smart room, my chair will recognize me when I sit in it, versus someone else. When I first plop down in the mornings, it will remember what I usually do in the A.M. It can then assist my routine, awakening appliances that need a warm-up, preparing the day's schedule. 
Every room also has at least one electronic display that is a yard-wide or 
bigger-a window, a painting, or a computer/TV screen. In Weiser's world of environmental computing, the big display in every room is the smartest nonhuman in the room. You talk to it, point over it, write on it and it understands. The big screen does movies, text, super graphics, whatever. It almost goes without saying that it is interconnected with all the other objects in the room, knows exactly what they are up to, and can represent them on its screen with some faithfulness. So I can interact with a book two ways: by handling the actual object or by handling its image on the screen. 
Every room becomes an environment of computation. The adaptive nature 
of computers recedes into the background until it is nearly invisible and ubiquitous. "The most profound technologies are those that disappear," says Weiser. "They weave themselves into the fabric of everyday life until they are indistinguishable from it." The technology of writing descended from elite status, steadily lowering itself out of our consciousness altogether until we now hardly notice words scribbled everywhere from logos stamped on fruit to movie subtitles. Motors began as huge noble beasts; they have since evaporated into micro-things fused (and forgotten) in most mechanical 
devices. George Gilder, writing in Microcosm, says, "The development of computers can be seen as the process of collapse. One component after another, once well above the surface of the microcosm, falls into the invisible sphere, and is never again seen clearly by the naked eye." The adaptive technologies that computers bring us started out as huge, conspicuous, and centralized. But as chips, motors, and sensors collapse into the invisible realms, their flexibility lingers as a distributed environment. The materials evaporate, leaving only their collective behavior. We interact with the collective behavior-the superorganism, the ecology-so that the room as a whole becomes an adaptive cocoon. 
Gilder again: "The computer will ultimately collapse to a pinhead that can 
respond to the human voice. In this form, human intelligence can be transmitted to any tool or appliance, to any part of our environment. Thus the triumph of the computer does not dehumanize the world; it makes our environment more subject to human will." It is not machines we are creating but a mechanical environment permeated with our sense of learning. We are extending our life into our surroundings. 
"You know the premise of virtual reality-to put you inside a computer world," 
says Mark Weiser. "Well, I want to do the opposite. I want to put the computer world around you on the outside. In the future, the smartness of computers will surround you." This is a nice switcheroo. Rather than have to don goggles and body suit to experience immersion in a computer- generated world, all you have to do to be completely surrounded by the magic of constant computation is to open a door.
Once you are in a net-ridden room, all smart rooms talk to each other. The 
big picture on the wall then is a portal into both my own room and into other folks' rooms. Say I hear about a book I should read. I do a data search for it in my building; my screen says a copy lives in Ralph's office, behind his desk on a shelf of company-bought books, and was used last week. There is also another copy in Alice's cubby, next to the computer manuals, that hasn't ever been read, even though it is her own personal purchase. I pick Alice and send her a loan plea on the net. She says okay. When I physically take the book from Alice's room, it reconfigures its display to match the rest of the books in my room as is my preference. (I like to have the pages I "dog-eared" displayed first.) The book's new location is recorded in its internal biography, and noted by everyone's databank. This book is unlikely to go the one-way journey of most borrowed books.
In the colony of a smart room, the telephone rings slightly louder if the 
stereo is on; the stereo lowers itself when the you answer the phone. Your office voice-mail unit knows your car is not in the parking lot so it tells the caller you haven't arrived yet. When you pick up a book, it tells the lamp above your favorite reading chair to turn on. Your TV notifies you that the novel you've been reading is available this week as a movie. Everything is connected to everything. Clocks listen to the weather, refrigerators watch the time and order milk before the carton is empty, and books remember 
where they are.
Weiser writes that in Xerox's experimental office, "doors open only to the 
right badge wearer, rooms greet people by name, telephone calls can be automatically forwarded to wherever the recipient may be, receptionists actually know where people are, computer terminals retrieve the preferences of whoever is sitting at them, and appointment diaries write themselves." But what if I don't want everyone in my department to know what room I'm in? Workers participating in initial trials of ubiquitous computing at Xerox PARC often left their office in order to get away from the phone-blob. They felt imprisoned by always being findable. Network culture cannot thrive without the technologies of privacy. Privacy in the form of personal encryption and unforgeable digital signatures are being rapidly developed (see following chapter). Privacy can also be secured in the anonymous nature of the mob.

Weiser's buildings are a coevolutionary ecology of machines. Each device 
is an organism that reacts to stimulus and communicates with the others. 
Cooperation is rewarded. Alone, most of the electronic bits are wimpy and would die of nonuse. Together, they form a community that is attentive and robust. What each microbit lacks in depth is made up by the communal net which casts its collective influence wide over a building, outreaching even a human. 
Not only would rooms and halls have embedded intelligence and ecological 
fluidity but entire streets, malls, and towns. Weiser uses the example of words. Writing, he says, is a technology that is ubiquitously embedded into our environment. Writing is everywhere, urban and suburban, passively waiting to be read. Now imagine, Weiser suggests, computation and connection embedded into the built environment to the same degree. Street signs would communicate to car navigation systems or a map in your hands (when street names change, all maps change too). Streetlights in a parking lot would flick on ahead of you in anticipation of your walk. Point to a billboard properly, and it would send you more information on its advertised product and let its sponsor know what part of the street most of the queries came from. The environment becomes animated, responsive, and adaptable. It responds not only to you but to all the other agents plugged in at the time.
One definition of a coevolutionary ecology is a collection of organisms that 
serve as their own environment. The flamboyant world of orchid flowers, ant colonies, and seaweed beds overflows with richness and mystery because the movie that each creature stars in features walk-ons and extras who are simultaneously acting as stars in their own movie filmed on the same lot. Every borrowed set is alive and liquid as the star is. Thus, the fate of a mayfly is primarily determined by the histrionics of neighboring frog, trout, alder, water spider, and the rest of stream life, each playing the environment for the other. Machines too will play on a coevolutionary stage.
The refrigerator you can purchase today is an arrogant snob. When you 
bring it home it assumes that it alone is the only appliance in the house. It has nothing to learn from other machines in the building, and nothing it will tell them. A wall clock will tell you the time of day but not its manufactured brethren. Each utensil haughtily serves only its buyer without regard to how much better it could serve in cooperation with the other items around it.
An ecology of machines, on the other hand, enhances the limited skills of 
dumb machines. The chips imbedded in book and chair have only the smartness of ants. They're no supercomputer; they could be manufactured now. But by the alien power of distributed being, sufficient numbers of antlike agents can be lifted into a type of colony intelligence by connecting them in bulk. More is different. 
Collaborative efficiency, however, has a price. An ecological intelligence will 
penalize anyone new to the room, just as a tundra ecology will penalize anyone new to the arctic. Ecologies demand local knowledge. The only folks who know where the mushrooms bloom in the woods are native sons. To track wallabies through the Australian outback you want a local bush ranger as a guide. 
Where there is an ecosystem, there are local experts. An outsider can 
muddle through an unfamiliar wilderness at some level, but to thrive or to survive a crisis, he'll require local expertise. Gardeners regularly surprise academic experts by growing things they aren't supposed to be able to grow because, as local experts, they tune into the neighborhood soil and climate. 
The work of managing a natural environment is inescapably a work of local 
knowledge. A roomful of mechanical organisms improvising with each other demands a similar local knowledge. The one advantage snooty old Refrigerator had was that he ignored everyone equally, owner and visitor alike. In a room enlivened by a colony intelligence, visitors are at a disadvantage. Every room will be different; indeed, every telephone will be different. Because the new phones will merely be one node of a far larger organism-linking furnace, cars, TVs, computers, chairs, whole buildings-whose own behavior will hinge on the holistic sum of everything else going on in the room. The behavior of each will particularly depend on how its most frequent user employs it. To visitors, the indefinite beast of a room will seem to be out of control. 
Adaptable technology means that technology that will adapt locally. The 
logic of the network induces regionalism and localism. Or to put it another way, global behavior entails regional variety. We see evidence of the shift already. Try using someone else's "smart" phone. It is already either too smart, or not smart enough. Do you dial "9" to get out? Can you punch any button for a line? How do you (gulp!) transfer a call? Only the owner knows for sure. The local knowledge needed to fully operate a VCR is legendary. Just because you can preprogram yours to record The Prisoner reruns doesn't in any way mean you can handle your friend's.
Rooms and buildings will vary in their electronic ecology, as will appliances 
within a room, since they all will be aggregations of smaller distributed parts. No one will know the idiosyncrasies of my office's technology as well as I will. Nor will I be able to work another's technology as easily as my 
own. As computers become assistants, toasters become pets.
When the designers get it right, the coffee machine that an impatient visitor 
tries to use will default to "novice mode" when it senses desperate attempts to make it work. Mr. Coffee will cop to the situation by engaging only the five basic universal appliance functions that every school child will know. 
But I find the emerging ecology in its earliest stages already daunting to 
strangers. Since computers are the locus where all these devices hail from and head toward, we can see in them now the alienness of unfamiliar complex machines. It doesn't matter how acquainted you are with a particular brand of computer. When you need to borrow someone else's, it feels like you're using their toothbrush. The instant you turn a friend's computer on, it's there: that strange arrangement of familiar parts (why do they do it like that?), the whole disorienting logic of a place you thought you knew. You kind of recognize it. There's an order here. Then, a moment of terror. You are...peering into someone else's mind!
The penetration goes both ways. So personal, so subtle, so minute is 
everyone's parochial intelligence of their own computer's ecology, that any disturbance is alarming. A pebble dislodged, a blade of grass bent, a file moved. "Someone has been in my compu-room! I know it!" 
There will be nice-dog rooms and bad-dog rooms. Bad-dog rooms will bite 
intruders. Nice-dog rooms will herd visitors to someplace safe, away from places where real harm can be done. The nice-dog room may entertain guests. People will acquire reputations on how well-trained their computers are and how well-groomed their computational ecology is. And others will gain notoriety for how fiercely wild their machinery is. There are sure to be neglected areas in large corporations someday where no one wants to work or visit because the computational infrastructure has been neglected to the point that it is rude, erratic, swampy (although brilliant), and unforgiving, yet no one has time to tame or retrain it.
Of course there is a strong counterforce to keep the environment uniform. 
As Danny Hillis pointed out to me, "The reason we create artificial environments instead of accepting natural ones is that we like our environments to be constant and predictable. We used to have a computer editor that let everyone have a different interface. So we all did. Then we discovered it was a bad idea because we couldn't use each other's terminals. So we went back to the old way: a shared interface, a common culture. That's part of what brings us together as humans."
Machines will never go completely on their own way, but they will become 
more aware of other machines. To survive in the Darwinian marketplace, their designers must recognize that these machines inhabit an environment of other machines. They gather a history together, and in the manufactured ecology of the future, they will have to share what they know.

On the counter of every American auto parts store sits a massive row of 
catalogs, a horizontal stack of pages as wide as a dump truck, spines down, 
page edges outward. Even from the other side of the Formica you can easily spot the dozen or so pages out of ten thousand that the mechanics use the most: their edges are smeared black by a mob of greasy fingers. The wear marks help the guys find things. Each soiled bald spot pinpoints a section they most often need to look up. Similar wear-indicators can be found in a cheap paperback. When you lay it down on your night table, its spine buckles open slightly at the page you were last reading. You can pick up your story the next evening at this spontaneous bookmark. Wear encodes useful information. When two trails diverge in a yellow wood, the one more worn tells you something.
Worn spots are emergent. They are sired by a mob of individual actions. Like 
most emergent phenomena, wear is liable to self-reinforce. A gouge in environment is likely to attract future gouges. Also, like most emergent properties, wear is communication. In real life "wear is tattooed directly on the object, appearing exactly where it can make an informative difference," says Will Hill, a researcher at Bellcore, the telephone companies' research consortium. 
What Hill would like to do is transfer the environmental awareness 
communicated by physical wear into the ecology of objects in an office. As an example, Hills suggests that an electronic document can be enriched by a record of how others interact with it. "While using a spreadsheet to refine a budget, the count of edit changes per spreadsheet cell can be mapped onto a gray scale to give a visual impression of which budget numbers have been reworked the most and least." This gives an indication of where confusion, controversy, or errors lie. Another example: businesses with an efficiency bent can track what parts of documents acquire the most editorial changes as it bounces back and forth between various departments. Programmers call such hot spots of wheel-spinning change "churns." They find it useful to know where, in a million lines of group-written programming code, the areas of churn are. Software makers and appliance manufacturers would gladly pay for amalgamated information about which aspects of their products are used the most or least, since such explicit feedback can improve them.
Where Hill works, all the documents that pass through his lab keep track of how others (human or machine) interact with them. When you select a text 
file to read, a thin graph on your screen displays little tick marks indicating the cumulative time others have spent reading this part. You can see at a glance the few places other readers lingered over. Might be a key passage, or a promising passage that was a little unclear. Community usage can also be indicated by gradually increasing the type size. The effect is similar to an enlarged "pull quote" in a magazine article, except these highlighted "used" sections emerge out of an uncontrolled collective appreciation.
Wear is a wonderful metaphor for a commonwealth. A single wear mark is 
useless. But bunched and shared, they prove valuable to all. The more they are distributed, the more valuable. Humans crave privacy, but the fact is, we are more social than solitary. If machines knew as much about each other as we know about each other (even in our privacy), the ecology of machines would be indomitable.

In mechanical communities, or ecosystems, some machines are more 
likely to associate with certain other machines, just as red-winged blackbirds 
favor nesting in cattail swamps. Pumps go with pipes, furnaces go with air- conditioners, switches go with wires. 
Machines form food webs. Viewed in the abstract, one machine "preys" upon 
another. One machine's input is another's output. A steel factory eats the effluent of an iron-mining machine. Its own extrusion of steel is in turn eaten by an automobile-making machine, and fashioned into a car. When the car dies it is consumed by a scrapyard crusher. The crusher's ejected iron cud is later swallowed by a recycling factory and excreted as, say, galvanized roofing. 
If you were to follow an iron particle as it was dug out of the ground to be 
passed up the industrial food chain, it would trace a crisscrossing circuit for its path. The first time around the particle may appear in a Chevrolet; the second cycle around it may land in a Taiwanese ship hull; the third time around it shapes up as a railroad rail; and the fourth as a ship again. Every raw material meanders through such a network. Sugar, sulfuric acid, diamonds, and oil all follow different routes, but each navigates a web that touches various machines and may even cycle around again to its elemental form. 
The tangled flow of manufactured materials from machine to machine can be 
seen as a networked community-an industrial ecology. Like all living systems, this interlocking human-made ecosystem tends to expand, to work around impediments, and to adapt to adversity. Seen in the right light, a robust industrial ecosystem is an extension of the natural ecosystem of the biosphere. As a splinter of wood fiber travels from tree to wood chip to newspaper and then from paper to compost to tree again, the fiber easily slips in and out of the natural and industrial spheres of a larger global megasystem. Stuff circles from the biosphere into the technosphere and back again in a grand bionic ecology of nature and artifact.
Yet, human-made industry is a weedy thing that threatens to overcome the 
natural sphere that ultimately supports it. The crabgrass character of industry sparks confrontations between advocates for nature and apologists of the artificial, both of whom believe only one side can prevail. However, in the last few years, a slightly romantic view that "the future of machines is 
biology" has penetrated science and flipped a bit of poetry into something useful. The new view claims: Both nature and industry can prevail. Employing the metaphor of organic machine systems, industrialists and (somewhat reluctantly) environmentalists can sketch out how manufacturing can repair its own messes, just as biological systems clean up after themselves. For instance, nature has no garbage problem because nothing becomes waste. An industry imitating this and other organic principles would be more compatible with the organic domain around it. 
Until recently the mandate to "do as nature does" has been impossible to 
implement among isolated and rigid machines. But as we invest machines, factories, and materials with adaptive behavior, coevolutionary dynamics, and global connections, we can steer the manufactured environment into an industrial ecology. Doing so shifts the big picture from industry conquering nature to industry cooperating with nature.
Hardin Tibbs is a British industrial designer who picked up a sense of 
machines as whole systems while consulting on large engineering projects such as the NASA space station. To make a remote space station, or any other large system, utterly reliable requires steady attention to all the interacting, and at times conflicting, needs of each mechanical subsystem. Balancing several machines' opposing demands, while unifying common ones, instilled a holistic attitude in engineer Tibbs. As an avid environmentalist, Tibbs wondered why this holistic mechanical outlook-which stresses a systems approach to minimizing inefficiencies-could not be applied to industry in general as a way to solve the pollution it generated. The idea, said Tibbs, was to "take the pattern of the natural environment as a model for solving environmental problems." He and his fellow engineers were calling it "industrial ecology."
The term "industrial ecology" was a metaphor resurrected by Robert Frosch 
in a 1989 Scientific American article. Frosch, a scientist who runs GM's research laboratories and was once head of NASA, defined this fresh perspective: "In an industrial ecosystem...the consumption of energy and materials is optimized, waste generation is minimized, and the effluents of one process... serve as the raw material for another process. The industrial ecosystem would function as an analogue of biological ecosystems." 
The term industrial ecology had been used since the 1970s as a way to think 
about workplace health and environmental issues, "stuff like whether you have mites living on dust particles in your factory or not," says Tibbs. Frosch and Tibbs expanded the concept of industrial ecology to include the environment formed by and among a web of machines. The goal according to Tibbs was "to model the systemic design of industry on the systemic design of the natural system" so that "we could not only improve the efficiency of industry but also find more acceptable ways of interfacing it with nature." In one daring step, engineers hijacked an age-old metaphor of machines as organisms and put the poetry to work.One of the first ideas born out of the organic view of manufacturing was the 
notion of "design for disassembly." Ease of assembly has been the paramount factor in manufacturing for decades. The easier something was to assemble, the cheaper it could be made. Ease of repair and ease of disposal were almost wholly neglected. In the ecological vision, a product designed for disassembly would combine the tradeoffs of efficient disposal or repair as well as efficient assembly. The best-designed automobile, then, would not only be a joy to drive, and cheap to assemble, but would also easily break apart into common ingredients when dead. These technicians aim to invent devices that adhere better than glues or one-way fasteners, but are reversible, and materials as sound as Kevlar and molded polycarbonate, but are easier to recycle. 
The incentive for these inventions is imposed by requiring the manufacturer, 
rather than the consumer, to be responsible for disposal. It pushes the burden of waste "upstream" to the producer. Germany recently passed legislation that makes it mandatory for automobile manufacturers to design cars that dismantle easily into homogeneous parts. You can buy a new electric tea kettle featuring easy-to-dismember recyclable parts. Aluminum cans are already designed for recycling. What if everything else was? You couldn't make a radio, a running shoe, or a sofa without accounting for the destination of its dead body. You'd have to work with your ecological partners-those preying upon your machine's matter-to ensure someone took on your corpses. Every product would incorporate its engineered offal.
"I think that you can go a long way with the idea that any waste you can 
think of is a potential raw resource," Tibbs says. "And any material that might not have a use right now, we can eliminate upstream by design so that that material is not produced. We already know, in principle, how to make intrinsically zero-pollution processes. The only reason we aren't doing so is because we haven't decided to do it. It's a matter of volition rather than technology."
All evidence points to ecological technology being cost effective, if not 
shockingly profitable. Since 1975, the global conglomerate 3M has saved $500 million while reducing pollution 50 percent per unit of production. By reformulating products, modifying production processes (to use less solvents, say), or simply by recovering "pollutants," 3M has made money by applying technical innovations to its internal industrial ecology.
Tibbs told me of another example of an internal ecosystem that pays for 
itself: "In Massachusetts a metal refinishing plant had been discharging heavy metal solutions into the local waterways for years. And every year the environmental people were raising water-purity thresholds, until it got to the point where the plant would either have to stop what they were doing and farm out the plating to somewhere else, or install a very expensive state-of-the-art full-scale water treatment plant. Instead the refinishers did something radical-they invented a totally closed-loop system. Such a system did not exist in electroplating."
A closed-loop system constantly recycles the same materials over and over 
again, just as Bio2 does or a space capsule should. In practice small amounts leak in and out in industrial systems, but overall, the bulk of mass circles in a "closed loop." The Massachusetts plating company devised a way to take the tremendous amounts of water and toxic solvents demanded by the dirty process and recycle them entirely within the walls of the factory. Their innovative system, which reduced pollution output to zero, also paid for itself in two years. Tibbs says, "The water treatment plant would have cost them $1/2 million, whereas their novel closed-loop system cost only about $1/4 million. They saved on water costs by no longer needing 1/2-million gallons per week. They reduced their chemical intake because they now reclaim the metals. At the same time they improved the quality of their plating product because their water filtration is so good that the reused water is cleaner than the local water they bought before."
Closed-loop manufacturing mirrors the natural closed-loop production in 
living plant cells, which internally circulate the bulk of their materials during nongrowth periods. The same zero-pollution closed-loop principles in a plating factory can be designed into an industrial park or entire region. Add a global perspective and you up the scale to cover the entire planetary network of human activity. Nothing is thrown away in this grand loop because there is no "away." Eventually, all machines, factories, and human institutions will be members of the greater global bionic system that imitates biological manners.
Tibbs can already point to one ongoing prototype. Eighty miles west of 
Copenhagen, local Danish businesses have cultivated an embryonic industrial ecosystem. About a dozen industries cooperate in exploiting "wastes" from neighboring factories in an open-loop which is steadily "closing in" as they learn how to recycle each other's effluent. A coal-fired electric power plant supplies an oil refinery with waste heat from its steam turbines (previously released into a nearby fjord). The oil company removes polluting sulfur from gas released by the refining process which can then be burned by the power plant, saving 30,000 tons of coal per year. The removed sulfur is sold to a nearby sulfuric acid plant. The power plant also precipitates pollutants from its coal smoke in the form of calcium sulfate, which is consumed as a substitute for gypsum by a sheetrock company. Ash removed from the same smoke goes to a cement factory. Other surplus steam from the power plant warms a biotech pharmaceutical plant and 3,500 homes, as well as a seawater trout farm. Hi-nutrient sludge from both the fish farm and the pharmaceutical factory's fermentation vats are used to fertilize local farms, and perhaps someday soon, also horticulture greenhouses warmed by the power plant's waste heat.
Yet, to be realistic, no matter how cleverly manufacturing loops are closed, a 
tiny fraction of energy or unusable stuff will be wasted into the biosphere. The impact of this inevitable entropy can be absorbed by the organic sphere if the mechanical systems that generate it run at the pace and scope of 
natural systems. Living organisms such as water hyacinth can condense dilute impurities in water into a concentration with economic value. In '90s lingo, if industry interfaces well with nature, biological organisms can carry what minimal waste the industrial ecosystem generates.
The bugaboos in larger versions of this optimistic vision are highly variable 
flows of material, and decentralized, dilute concentrations of reclaimable stuff. Nature excels in dealing with variance and dilute being, while human artifacts do not. A multi-million-dollar paper recycling plant needs an unvarying stream of constant quality old paper to operate; it cannot afford to be down a day if volunteers tire of bundling their used newspapers. The usual solution, massive storage centers for recycled resources, burns up its slim profitability. Industrial ecology must grow into a networked just-in-time system that dynamically balances the flow of materials so that local overflows and shortages are shuttled around to minimize variable stocks. More net-driven "flex-factories" will be able to handle a more erratic quality of resources by running adaptable machinery or making fewer units of more different kinds of products.

Technologies of adaptation, such as distributed intelligence, flex-time 
accounting, niche economics, and supervised evolution, all stir up the 
organic in machines. Wired together into one megaloop, the world of the made slips steadily toward the world of the born.
As Tibbs studied what was needed to imitate "the world of the born" in 
manufacturing, he became convinced that industrial activities would become "sustainable," to use current jargon, as they become more organic. Imagine, Tibbs suggests, that we push grimy workaday industrial processes toward the character of biological processes. Instead of the high-pressure and high-temperature needs of most factories, lay out a factory operating within the everyday range of biological values. "Biological metabolism is primarily fueled by solar energy and operates at ambient temperatures and pressures," Tibbs writes in his landmark 1991 monograph Industrial Ecology. "If this were true of industrial metabolism, there could be significant gains in plant operating safety." Hot is fast, furious, and efficient. Cool is slow, safe, and flexible. Life is cool. Pharmaceutical companies are undergoing a revolution as bioengineered yeast cells replace toxic, solvent-intense chemicals to create medicinal drugs. While the pharmaceutical factory's hi-tech plumbing remains, genes spliced into a living yeasty soup take over as the engine. The use of bacteria to extract mineral ores from spent mine tailings-a job that in the industrial past required harsh and environmentally destructive methods-is another proven biological-scale process replacing a mechanical one. 
Although life is built upon carbon, it is not powered by it. But carbon has 
fueled industrial development, as well as its accompanying atmospheric shock. CO2 and other pollutants burn off into the air in direct proportion to the presence of complex hydrocarbons in fuel. The more carbon, the more mess. Yet the real energy gain in fuels does not come from burning the carbon component of hydrocarbons, but the hydrogen portion. 
The best fuel of the ancients was wood. Expressed as the proportion of 
carbon to hydrogen, fuelwood is roughly 91 percent carbon. During the peak of the industrial revolution, the preferred fuel was coal, which is 50 percent carbon. Oil for the modern factory is 33 percent carbon, while natural gas, the upcoming favorite clean fuel is 20 percent carbon. Tibbs notes that, "As the industrial system has evolved [fuels] have become increasingly hydrogen-rich. In theory at least, pure hydrogen would be the ideal 'clean 
fuel.'"
A future "hydrogen economy" would use sunlight to crack water into 
hydrogen and oxygen, and then pump the hydrogen around like natural gas, burning it for energy where needed. Such an environmentally benign carbonless energy system would ape the photon-based powerpacks in plant cells.
By pushing industrial processes toward the organic model, bionic engineers 
create a spectrum of ecosystem types. At one extreme are pure, natural ecosystems like an alpine meadow or a mangrove swamp. These systems can selfishly be thought to produce biomass, oxygen, foodstuffs, and thousands of fancy organic chemicals, a few of which we harvest. At the other extreme are pure, raw industrial systems, which synthesize compounds not found in nature, or not found in such large volumes. In between are a spectrum of hybrid ecosystems such as marshland sewage treatment plants (which use microbes to digest waste) or wineries (which use living yeast to make vintage brews), and soon, bioengineered processes that will use gene-spliced organisms to produce silk or vitamins or glues.
Both genetic engineering and industrial ecology promise the third category 
of bionic systems-part biology, part machine. We have only begun to imagine the varieties of ecotech systems that could create the things we desire. 
Industry will inevitably adopt biological ways because:
●     It takes less material to do the same job better. Cars, planes, houses, 
and, of course, computers, now consume less material than two decades ago, and give far better performance. Most of the processes that will generate our wealth in the future will shrink to biological scale and resolution, even when these processes make products as large as redwood trees. Manufacturers will perceive natural biological processes as competitive and inspirational, and this will drive manufactured processes toward biological-type solutions.
●     The complexity of built things now reaches biological complexity. Nature, the master manager of complexity, offers priceless guidance in handling messy, counterintuitive webs. Artificial complex systems will be deliberately infused with organic principles simply to keep them going.
●     Nature will not move, so it must be accommodated. Nature-which is larger than us and our contraptions-sets the underlying pace for industrial progress, so the artificial will have to conform to the natural in the long term. ●     The natural world itself-genes and life forms-can be engineered (and 
patented) just like industrial systems. This trend narrows the gap between the two spheres of natural and artificial/industrial ecosystems, making it easier for industry to finance and appreciate the biological.
Anyone can see that our world is steadily paving itself over with human-made gadgets. Yet for every rapid step our society takes toward the manufactured, it is taking an equally quick step toward the biological. While electronic gizmos dazzle, they are here primarily to ferment the real revolution...in biology. The next century ushers in an era not of silicon-as everyone trumpets-but of biology: Mice. Viruses. Genes. Ecology. Evolution. Life. 
Sort of. What the next century will really usher in is hyperbiology: Synthetic 
Mice. Computer Viruses. Engineered Genes. Industrial Ecology. Supervised Evolution. Artificial Life. (But they all are of one.) Silicon research is stampeding toward biology. Teams are in hot competition to design computers that not only assist the study of nature, but are natural themselves.
Note the woolly flavor of these recent technical conferences and workshops: 
Adaptive Computation (Santa Fe, April 1992), modeling organic flexibility into computer programs; Biocomputation (Monterey, June 1992), claiming that "natural evolution is a computational process of adaptation to an ever changing environment"; Parallel Problem Solving from Nature (Brussels, September 1992), treating nature as a supercomputer; The Fifth International Conference on Genetic Algorithms (San Diego, 1992), mimicking DNA's power of evolution; and uncountable conferences on neural networks, which focus on copying the distinctive structure of the brain's neurons as a model for learning.
Ten years from now the wowiest products in your living room, office, or 
garage will be based on ideas from these pioneering meetings.
Here in one paragraph is a pop-history of the world: The African savanna 
hatches human hunter-gatherers-raw biology; the hunter-gatherers hatch agriculture-domestication of the natural; the farmers hatch the industrial-domestication of the machine; the industrialists hatch the currently emerging postindustrial whatever. We are still figuring out what it is, but I'll call it the marriage of the born and the made. 
To be precise, the flavor of the next epoch is neo-biological rather than 
bionic, because, although it may start symmetrically, biology always wins in any blending of organic and machine.
Biology always wins because the organic is not a sacred stance. It is not a 
holy status that living entities inherit by some mystical means. Biology is an inevitability-almost a mathematical certainty-that all complexity will drift 
towards. It is an omega point. In the slow mingling of the made and born, the organic is a dominant trait, while the mechanic is recessive. In the end, bio-logic always wins.