THE NATURAL FLUX 
Tonight is the Chinese Lunar Festival. Downtown in San Francisco's 
Chinatown, immigrants are exchanging moon cakes and telling tales of the 
Ghost Maiden who escaped as an orb in the sky. Twelve miles away where I live, I can walk in a cloud. The fog of the Golden Gate has piled up along the steep bank behind our house, engulfing our neighborhood in vapor. Under the light of Lady Moon, I take a midnight hike. 
I wade chest-high in bleached ryegrass murmuring in the wind, and spy 
down the rugged coast of California. It is a disruptive land. For most purposes it is a mountainous desert that meets a generous ocean which cannot provide rain. Instead the sea sneaks in the water of life by rolling out blankets of fog at night. Come morning, the mist condenses into drops on the edges of twig and leaf, which tinkle to the earth. Much water is transported this way over a summer, bypassing the monopoly thunderclouds have on water delivery elsewhere. On this stingy substitute rain, the behemoth of all living things, the redwood, thrives.
The advantage of rain is that it is massive and indiscriminate. When it rains, 
it will wet a wide, diverse constituency. Fog on the other hand, is local. It relies on low-powered convection currents to ramble wherever it is easiest to drift to, and is then trapped by gentle, patient cul-de-sacs in the hills. In this way, the shape of the land steers the water, and indirectly, life. The correctly shaped hill can catch fog, or funnel drip into a canyon. A sunny south-facing mound will lose more precious moisture to evaporation than a shadier northern slope. Certain outcroppings of soil retain water better than others. Play these variables on top of each other and you have a patchwork of habitats. In a desert land, water decides life. And in a desert land where water is not delivered democratically, but parochially, on a whim, the land itself decides life.
The result is a patchwork landscape. The hills behind my house are cloaked 
with three separate quilts. A community of low-lying grass-and of mice, owl, thistle, and poppy-runs to the sea on one slope. On the crest of the hill, gnarly juniper and cypress trees preside over a separate association of deer, fox, and lichen. And on the other side of the rise, an endless impenetrable thicket of poison oak and coyote brush hides quail and other members of its guild.The balance of these federations is kinetic. Their mutual self-supporting pose 
is continuously almost-falling, like a standing wave in a spring creek. When the mass of nature's creatures push against each other in coevolutionary embrace, their interactions among the uneven terrain of land and weather breaks their aggregate into local enclaves of codependency. And these patches roam over the land in time.
Wind and spring floods erode soils, exposing underlying layers and 
premiering new compositions of humus and minerals on the surface. As the mix of soil churns on the land, the mix of plants and animals coupled to it likewise churn. A thick stand of cactus, such as a Saguaro forest, can migrate onto or off of a patch of southwestern desert in little as 100 years. In a time-lapse film, a Saguaro grove would seem to creep across the desertscape like a pool of mercury. And it's not just cactus that would roam. Under the same time-lapse view, the wildflower prairie savanna of the midwest would flow around stands of oaks like an incoming tide, sometimes dissolving the woods into prairie, and sometimes, if the wildfires died out, retreating from the spreading swell of oak groves. Ecologist Dan Botkin speaks of forests "marching slowly across the landscape to the beat of the changing climate."
"Without change, deserts deteriorate," claims Tony Burgess, a burly ecologist with a huge red beard. Burgess is in love with deserts. He inhales desert lore and data all his waking hours. Out in the stark sun near Tucson, Arizona, he has been monitoring a desert plot that several generations of scientists have continuously measured and photographed for 80 years; the plot is the longest uninterrupted ecological observation anywhere. From studying the data of 80 years of desert change, Burgess has concluded that "variable rainfall is the key to the desert. Every year it should be a slightly different ball game to keep every species slightly out of equilibrium. If rainfall is variant then the mixture of species increases by two or three orders of magnitude. Whereas if you have a constant schedule of rainfall with respect to the annual temperature cycle, the beautiful desert ecology will almost always collapse into something simpler."
"Equilibrium is dead," Burgess states matter-of-factly. This opinion has not 
been held very long by the ecological science community. "Until the mid-1970s we were all working under a legacy which said that communities are on a trajectory towards an unchanging equilibrium, the climax. But now we see that it is turbulence and variance that really gives the richness to nature."
A major reason why ecologists favored equilibrium end points in nature was 
exactly the same reason why economists favored equilibrium end points in the economy: the mathematics of equilibria were possible. You could write an equation for a process that you could actually solve. But if you said that the system was perpetually in disequilibrium, you were saying it followed a model you couldn't solve and therefore couldn't explore. You were saying almost nothing. It is no coincidence, therefore, that a major shift in 
ecological (and economic) understanding occurred in the era when cheap computers made nonequilibrial and nonlinear equations easy to program. It was suddenly no problem to model a chaotic, coevolutionary ecosystem on a personal computer, and see that, hey, it acts very much like the odd behavior of a Saguaro forest or a prairie savanna on the march.
A thousand varieties of nonequilibrial models have blossomed in recent 
years; in fact there is now a small cottage industry of makers of chaotic and nonlinear mathematics, differential equations, and complexity theory, all this activity lending a hand in overturning the notion that nature or an economy seeks a stable balance. This new perspective-that a certain unremitting flux is the norm-has illuminated past data for reinterpretation. Burgess can display old photographs of the desert that show in a relatively short time-over a few decades-patches of Saguaro drifting over the Tucson basin. "What we found from our desert plot," Burgess said, "is that these patches are not in sync in terms of development and that by not being in sync, they make the whole desert richer because if something catastrophic wipes out one patch, another patch at a different stage of its natural history can export organisms and seeds to the decimated patch. Even ecosystems, such as tropical rain forests, which don't have variable rainfall, also have patch dynamics due to periodic storms and tree falls."
"Equilibrium is not only dead, it is death," Burgess emphasizes. "To enrich a 
system you need variance in time and space. But too much change will kill you too. You go from an ecocline to ecotone."
Burgess finds nature's reliance on disturbances and variance to be a 
practical issue. "In nature, it is no problem if you have very erratic production [of vegetation, seeds, or meat] from year to year. Nature actually increases her richness from this variance. But when people try to sustain themselves on the production from an ecosystem like a desert that is so variance driven, they can only do it by simplifying the system into what we call agriculture-which gives a constant production for a variable environment." Burgess hopes the flux of the desert can teach us how to live with a variable environment without simplifying it. It is not a completely foolish dream. Part of what an information-driven economy provides us with is an adaptable infrastructure that can bend and work around irregular production; this is the basis for flexible and "just-in-time" manufacturing. It is theoretically possible that we could use information networks to coordinate the investment and highly irregular output of a rich, fluxing ecosystem that provides food and organic resources. But, as Burgess admits, "At the moment we have no industrial economic models that are variance driven, except gambling."
continue...   
 
Out of Control
If it is true that nature is fundamentally in constant flux, then instability 
may cause the richness of biological forms in nature. But the idea that the 
elements of instability are the root of diversity runs counter to one of the hoariest dictums of environmentalism: that stability begets diversity, and diversity begets stability. If natural systems do not settle into a neat balance, then we should make instability our friend.
Biologists finally got their hands on computers in the late 1960s and began 
to model kinetic ecologies and food webs on silicon networks. One of the first questions they attempted to answer was, Where does stability come from? If you create predator/prey relationships in silico, what conditions cause the virtual organisms to settle into a long-term coevolutionary duet, and what conditions cause them to crash?
Among the earliest studies of simulated stability was a paper published in 
1970 by Gardner and Ashby. Ashby was an engineer interested in nonlinear control circuits and the virtues of positive feedback loops. Ashby and Gardner programmed simple network circuits in hundreds of variations into a computer, systematically changing the number of nodes and the degrees of connectivity between nodes. They discovered something startling: that beyond a certain threshold, increasing the connectivity would suddenly decrease the ability of the system to rebound after disturbances. In other words, complex systems were less likely to be stable than simple ones. 
A similar conclusion was published the following year by theoretical biologist 
Robert May, who ran model ecologies on computers populated with large multitudes of interacting species, and some virtual ecologies populated with few. His conclusions contradicted the common wisdom of stability/diversity, and he cautioned against the "simple belief" that stability is a consequence of increasing complexity of the species mix. Rather, May's simulated ecologies suggested that neither simplicity nor complexity had as much impact on stability as the pattern of the species interaction. 
"In the beginning, ecologists built simple mathematical models and simple 
laboratory microcosms. They were a mess. They lost species like crazy," Stuart Pimm told me. "Later ecologists built more complex systems in the computer and in the aquarium. They thought these complex ones would be good. They were wrong. They were an even worse mess. Complexity just makes things very difficult-the parameters have to be just right. So build a 
model at random and, unless it's really simple (a one-prey-one-resource population model) it won't work. Add diversity, interactions, or increase the food chain lengths and soon these get to the point where they will also fall apart. That's the theme of Gardner, Ashby, May and my early work on food webs. But keep on adding species, keep on letting them fall apart and, surprisingly, they eventually reach a mix that will not fall apart. Suddenly one gets order for free. It takes a lot of repeated messes to get it right. The only way we know how to get stable, persistent, complex systems is to repeatedly assemble them. And as far as I know, no one really understands why that works."
In 1991 Stuart Pimm, together with colleagues John Lawton and Joel Cohen, 
reviewed all the field measurements of food webs in the wild and by analyzing them mathematically concluded that "the rate at which populations recovered from disasters...depends on food chain length," as well as the number of prey and predators a species had. An insect eating a leaf is a chain of one. A turtle eating the insect that eats the leaf makes a chain of two. A wolf may sit many links away from a leaf. In general, the longer the chain, the less stable the interacting web to environmental disruption. 
The other important point one can extract from May's simulations was best 
articulated in an observation made a few years earlier by the Spanish ecologist Ramon Margalef. Margalef noticed, as May did, that systems with many components would have weak relations between them, while systems that had few components would have tightly coupled relationships. Margalef put it this way: "From empirical evidence it seems that species that interact freely with others do so with a great number of other species. Conversely, species with strong interactions are often part of a system with a small number of species." This apparent tradeoff in an ecosystem between many loosely coupled members or few tightly coupled members is nicely paralleled by the now well-known tradeoff which biological organisms must choose in reproduction strategies. They can either produce a few well-protected offspring or a zillion unprotected ones.
Biology suggests that in addition to regulating the numbers of connections 
per "node" in a network, a system tends to also regulate the "connectance" (the strength of coupledness) between each pair of nodes in a network. Nature seems to conserve connectance. We should thus expect to find a similar law of the conservation of connectance in cultural, economic, and mechanical systems, although I am not aware of any studies that have attempted to show this. If there is such a law in all vivisystems, we should also expect to find this connectance being constantly adjusted, perpetually in flux. 
"An ecosystem is a network of living creatures," says Burgess. The creatures 
are wired together in various degrees of connectance by food webs and by smells and vision. Every ecosystem is a dynamic web always in flux, always in the processes of reshaping itself. "Wherever we seek to find constancy we 
discover change," writes Botkin.
When we make a pilgrimage to Yellowstone National Park, or to the 
California Redwood groves, or to the Florida Everglades, we are struck by the reverent appropriateness of nature's mix in that spot. The bears seem to belong in those Rocky Mountain river valleys; the redwoods seem to belong on those coastal hills, and the alligators seem to belong in those plains. Thus our spiritual urge to protect them from disturbance. But in the long view, they are natural squatters who haven't been there long and won't always be there. Botkin writes, "Nature undisturbed is not constant in form, structure, or proportion, but changes at every scale of time and space." 
A study of pollen lifted from holes drilled at the bottom of African lakes 
shows that the African landscape has been in a state of flux for the past several million years. Depending on when you looked in, the African landscape would look vastly different from now. In the recent geological past, the Sahara desert vastness of northern Africa was tropical forest. It's been many ecological types between then and now. We hold wilderness to be eternal; in reality, nature is constrained flux.
Complexity poured into the artificial medium of machines and silicon chips 
will only be in further flux. We see, too, that human institutions-those ecologies of human toil and dreams-must also be in a state of constant flux and reinvention, yet we are always surprised or resistant when change begins. (Ask a hip postmodern American if he would like to change the 200-year-old rule book known as the Constitution. He'll suddenly become medieval.)
Change, not redwood groves or parliaments, is eternal. The questions 
become: What controls change? How can we direct it? Can the distributed life in such loose associations as governments, economies, and ecologies be controlled in any meaningful way? Can future states of change even be predicted?
Let's say you purchase a worn-out 100-acre farm in Michigan. You fence the 
perimeter to keep out cows and people. Then you walk away. You monitor the fields for decades. That first summer, garden weeds take over the plot. Each year thereafter new species blow in from outside the fence and take root. Some newcomers are eventually overrun by newer newcomers. An ecological combo self-organizes itself on the land. The mix fluxes over the years. Would a knowledgeable ecologist watching the fencing-off be able to predict which wildlife species would dominate the land a century later?
"Yes, without a doubt he could," says Stuart Pimm. "But his prediction is not 
as interesting as one might think."
The final shape of the Michigan plot is found in every standard ecology college textbook in the chapter on the concept of succession. The first year's 
weeds on the Michigan plot are annual flowering plants, followed by tougher perennials like crabgrass and ragweed. Woodier shrubs will shade and suppress the flowers, followed by pines, which suppress the shrubs. But the shade of the pine trees protect hardwood seedlings of beech and maple, which in turn steadily elbow out the pines. One hundred years later the land is almost completely owned by a typical northern hardwood forest.
It is as if the brown field itself is a seed. The first year it sprouts a hair of 
weeds, a few years later it grows a shrubby beard, and then later it develops into a shaggy woods. The plot unfolds in predictable stages just as a tadpole unfolds out of a frog's egg. 
Yet, the curious thing about this development is that if you start with a 
soggy 100-acre swamp, rather than a field, or with the same size lot of Michigan dry sandy dunes, the initial succession species are different (sedges in the swamp, raspberries on the sand), but the mix of species gradually converges to the same end point of a hardwood forest. All three seeds hatch the same adult. This convergence led ecologists to the notion of an omega point, or a climax community. For a given area, all ecological mixtures will tend to shift until they reach a mature, ultimate, stable harmony. 
What the land "wants" to be in the temperate north is a hardwood forest. 
Give it enough time and that's what a drying lake or a windblown sand bog will become. If it ever warmed up a little, that's what an alpine mountaintop wants to be also. It is as if the ceaseless strife in the complicated web of eat-or-be-eaten stirs the jumble of species in the region until the mixture arrives at the hardwood climax (or the specific climax in other climates), at which moment it quietly settles into a tolerable peace. The land coming to a rest in the climax blend.
Mutual needs of diverse species click together so smartly in the climax 
arrangement that the whole is difficult to disrupt. In the space of 30 years the old-growth chestnut forest in North America lost every specimen of a species-the mighty chestnut-that formerly constituted a significant hunk of the forest's mass. Yet, there weren't any huge catastrophes in the rest of the forest; it still stands. This persistent stability of a particular composite of species-an ecosystem-speaks of some basin of efficiency that resembles the coherence belonging to an organism. Something whole, something alive dwells in that mutual support. Perhaps a maple forest is but a grand organism composed of lesser organisms. 
On the other hand, Aldo Leopold writes, "In terms of conventional physics, 
the grouse represents only a millionth of either the mass or the energy of an acre. Yet subtract the grouse and the whole thing is dead."
continue...   
 
Out of Control
In 1916, Frederic Clements, one of the founding fathers of ecology, called a 
community of creatures such as the beech hardwood forest an emergent 
superorganism. In his words, a climax formation is a superorganism because it "arises, grows, matures, and dies....comparable in its chief features with the life history of an individual plant." Since a forest could reseed itself on an abandoned Michigan field, Clements portrayed that act as reproduction, a further characteristic of an organism. To any astute observer, a beech-maple forest displays an integrity and identity as much as a crow does. What else but a (super)organism could reproduce itself so reliably, propagating on empty fields and sandy barrens? 
Superorganism was a buzz word among biologists in the 1920s. They used it 
to describe the then novel idea that a collection of agents could act in concert to produce phenomena governed by the collective. Like a slime mold that assembled itself from moldy spots into a thrusting blob, an ecosystem coalesced into a stable superorganization-a hive or forest. A Georgia pine forest did not act like a pine tree, nor a Texas sagebrush desert like a sagebrush, just as a flock is not a big bird. They were something else, a loose federation of animals and plants united into an emergent superorganism exhibiting distinctive behavior. 
A rival of Clements, biologist H. A. Gleason, the other father of modern 
ecology, thought the superorganism federation was too flabby and too much the product of a human mind looking for patterns. In opposition to Clements, Gleason proposed that the climax community was merely a fortuitous association of organisms that came and went depending on climate and geological conditions. An ecosystem was more like a conference than a community-indefinite, pluralistic, tolerant, and in constant flux.
The wilds of nature hold evidence for both views. In places the boundary 
between communities is decisive, much as one expects if ecosystems are superorganisms. Along the rocky coast of the Pacific Northwest, for instance, the demarcation between the high tide seaweed community and the watery edge of the spruce forest is an extreme no-man's-land of barren beach. One can stand on this yard-wide strip of salty desert and sense the two superorganisms on either side, fidgeting in their separate lives. As another example, the border between deciduous forest and wildflower prairie in the midwest is remarkably impermeable. In search of an answer to the riddle of ecological superorganisms, biologist 
William Hamilton began modeling ecosystems on computers in the 1970s. He found that in his models (as well as in real life) very few systems were able to self-organize into any kind of lasting coherence. My examples above are a few exceptions in the wild. He found a few others: a sphagnum moss peat bog can repel the invasion of pine trees for thousands of years. Ditto for the tundra steppes. But most ecological communities stumble along into a mongrel mixture of species that offers no outstanding self- protection to the group as a team. Most ecological communities, both simulated and real, can be easily invaded in the longer run.
Gleason was right. The couplings between members of an ecosystem are far 
more flexible and transient than the couplings between members of an organism. The cybernetic difference between an organism such as a pollywog and an ecosystem such as a fresh-water bog is that an organism is tightly bound, and strict; an ecosystem is loosely bound, and lax. 
In the long view, ecologies are temporary networks. Although some links 
become hardwired and nearly symbiotic, most species are promiscuous in evolutionary time, shacking up with a different partners as the partners themselves evolve.
In this light of evolutionary time, ecology can be seen as one long dress 
rehearsal. It's an identity workshop for biological forms. Species try out different roles with one another and explore partnerships. Over time, roles and performance are assimilated by an organism's genes. In poetic language, the gene is reluctant to assimilate into its code any interactions and functions directly based upon its neighbors' ways because the neighborhood can shift at any evolutionary moment. It pays to stay flexible, unattached, and uncommitted.
At the same time Clements was right. There is a basin of efficiency that, all 
things being equal, will draw down a certain mix of parts into a stable harmony. As a metaphor, consider the way rocks make their way to the valley floor. Not all rocks will land at the bottom; a particular rock may get stuck on a small hill somewhere. In the same way, stable intermediate less-than- climax mixtures of species can be found in places on the landscape. For extremely short periods of geological time-hundreds of thousands of years-ecosystems form an intimate troupe of players, who brook no interference and need no extras. These associations are far briefer than even the brief life of individual species, which typically flame-out after a million years or two.
Evolution requires a certain connectance among its participants to express 
its power; and so evolutionary dynamics exert themselves most forcefully in tightly coupled systems. In systems connected loosely, such as ecosystems, economic systems, and cultural systems, a less structured adaptation takes place. We know very little about the general dynamics of loosely coupled systems because this kind of distributed change is messy and infinitely 
indirect. Howard Pattee, an early cybernetician, defined hierarchical structure as a spectrum of connectance. He said, "To a Platonic mind, everything in the world is connected to everything else-and perhaps it is. Everything is connected, but some things are more connected than others." Hierarchy for Pattee was the product of differential connectedness within one system. Members that were so loosely connected as to be "flat" would tend to form a separate organizational level distinct from areas where members were tightly connected. The range of connectance created a hierarchy.
In the most general terms, evolution is a tight web and ecology a loose one. 
Evolutionary change seems a strongly bound process very similar to mathematical computation, or even to thinking. In this way it is "cerebral." Ecological change, on the other hand, seems a weak-minded, circuitous process, centered in bodies shoved against wind, water, gravity, sunlight, and rock. "Community [ecological] attributes are more the product of environment than the product of evolutionary history," writes ecologist Robert Ricklefs. While evolution is governed by the straightforward flow of symbolic information issuing from the gene or computer chips, ecology is governed by the far less abstract, far more untidy complexity embodied by flesh.
Because evolution is such a symbolic process, we now can artificially create 
it and attempt to govern it. But because ecological change is so body bound, we cannot synthesize it well until we can more easily simulate bodies and richer artificial environments.

Where does diversity come from? In 1983, microbiologist Julian Adams 
discovered a clue when he brewed up a soup of cloned E. coli bacteria. He 
purified the broth until he had a perfectly homogenized pool of identical creatures. He put this soup of clones into a specially constructed chemostat that provided a uniform environment for them-every E. coli bug had the same temperature and nutrient bath. Then he let the soup of identical bugs replicate and ferment. At the end of 400 generations, the E. coli bacteria had bred new strains of itself with slightly different genes. Out of a starting point in a constant featureless environment, life spontaneously diversified.
A surprised Adams dissected the genes of the variants (they weren't new 
species) to find out what happened. One of the original bugs had undergone a mutation that caused it to excrete acetate, an organic chemical. A second bug experienced a mutation that allowed it to make use of the acetate excreted from the first. Suddenly a symbiotic codependence of acetate maker and acetate eater had emerged from the uniformity, and the pool diverged into an ecology.
Although uniformity can yield diversity, variance does better. If the Earth 
were as smooth as a shiny ball bearing-a perfect spherical chemostat spread evenly with uniform climate and homogeneous soils-then the diversity of ecological communities on it would be far reduced from what it is now. In a constant environment, all variation and all diversity must be driven by internal forces. The only constraints on life would be other coevolutionary life. 
If evolution had its way, with no interference from geographical and 
geological dynamics-that is, without the clumsiness of a body-then mindlike evolution would feed upon itself and breed heavily recursive relationships. On a globe without mountains or storms or unexpected droughts, evolution would wind life into a ever-tightening web of coevolution, a smooth world stuffed with parasites, parasites upon parasites (hyperparasites), mimics, and symbionts, all caught up in accelerating codependence. But each species would be so tightly coupled with the others that it would be difficult to distinguish where the identity of one began and the other left off. Eventually evolution on a ball-bearing planet would mold everything into a single, massive, ultradistributed planetwide superorganism. Creatures born in the rugged environments of arctic climes must deal with 
the unpredictable variations that nature is always throwing at them. Freezing at night, baking during the day, ice storms after spring thaw, all create a rugged habitat. Habitats in the tropics and in the very deep sea are relatively "smooth" because of their constant temperature, rainfall, lightfall, and nutrients. Thus the smoothness of tropical or benthic environments allows species there to relinquish the need to adapt in physiological ways and allows them room to adapt in purely biological ways. In these steady habitats we should expect to see many instances of weird symbiotic and parasitic relationships-parasites preying upon parasites, males living inside of females, and creatures mimicking and mirroring other creatures-and that's what we do find.
Without a rugged environment life can only play off itself. It will still produce 
variation and novelty. But far more diversity can be manufactured in natural and artificial worlds by setting creatures in a rugged and vastly differentiated environment. 
This lesson has not been lost on the wannabe gods trying to create lifelike 
behavior in computer worlds. When self-replicating and self-mutating computer viruses are loosed into a computer memory uniformly distributed with processing resources, the computer viruses quickly evolve a host of wildly recursive varieties including parasites, hyperparasites, and hyper- hyperparasites. David Ackley, one computer life researcher, told me, "I finally figured out that the way to get wonderfully lifelike behavior is not to try to make a really complex creature, but to make a wonderfully rich environment for a simple creature."

It's two o'clock on a blustery afternoon, six months after my midnight 
hike, when I climb the hill behind my house again. The windblown grass is 
green from the winter's rain. Up near the ridge I stop at a circle where the deer have matted the soft grass into a cushion. The trampled stems are weathered, buff with a tinge of violet, as if the color has rubbed off the deer's bellies. I rest in this recess. The wind swipes overhead.
I can see wildflowers crouched among the blown grass blades. For some 
reason every species is blue-violet: lupine, blue-eyed grass, thistle, gentian. Between me, the bent grass, and the ocean there are shrubs, squat creatures outfitted with silvery olive leaves-standard desert issue. 
Here's a stem of Queen Anne's lace. Its furrowed leaves are mind- 
bogglingly intricate. Each leaf has two dozen minileaves arrayed on it, and each of those minileaves has a dozen microleaves arrayed on it. The recursive shape is the result of some obsessive process, no doubt. Its bunched flower head, 30 miniature cream white florets surrounding a single tiny purple floret in the center, is equally unexpected. On this one slope where I rest, the diversity of living forms is overwhelming in its detail and unlikeliness.
I should be impressed. But what strikes me as I sit among two million grass 
plants and several thousand juniper shrubs, is how similar life on Earth is. For all the possible shapes and behaviors animated matter could take, only a few-in wide variation-are tried out. Life can't fool me. It's all the same, like those canned goods in grocery stores with different labels but all manufactured by the same food conglomerate. Life on Earth obviously all comes from one transnational conglomerate.
The grass pushing up on my seat, the scraggly thistle stem rubbing my 
shirt, the brown-breasted swallow swooping downhill: they are a single thing stretching out in many directions. I recognized it because I am stretched into it too. 
Life is a networked thing-a distributed being. It is one organism extended in 
space and time. There is no individual life. Nowhere do we find a solo organism living. Life is always plural. (And not until it became plural-cloning itself-could life be called life.) Life entails interconnections, links, and shared multiples. "We are of the same blood, you and I," coos the poet Mowgli. Ant, 
we are of the same blood, you and I. Tyrannosaurus, we are of the same blood, you and I. AIDS virus, we are of the same blood, you and I.
The apparent individuals that life has dispersed itself into are illusions. "Life 
is [primarily] an ecological property, and an individual property for only a fleeting moment," writes microbiologist Clair Folsome, a man who dabbled in making superorganisms inside bottles. We live one life, distributed. Life is a transforming flood that fills up empty containers and then spills out of them on its way to fill up more. The shape and number of vessels submerged by the flood doesn't make a bit of difference.
Life works as an extremist, a fanatic without moderation. It infiltrates 
everywhere. It saturates the atmosphere, covers the Earth's surface and wheedles its way into bedrock cracks. It will not be refused. As Lovelock noted, we have dug up no ancient rocks without also digging up ancient life preserved in them. John von Neumann, who thought of life in mathematical terms, said, "living organisms are...by any reasonable theory of probability or thermodynamics, highly improbable...[However] if by any peculiar accident there should ever be one of them, from there on the rules of probability do not apply, and there will be many of them." Life once made, filled the Earth immediately, commandeering matter from all the realms-gas, liquid, solid-into its schemes. "Life is a planetary-scale phenomenon," said James Lovelock. "There cannot be sparse life on a planet. It would be as unstable as half of an animal."
A thin membrane of whole life now covers the entire Earth. It is a coat that 
cannot be taken off. Rip one seam and the coat will patch itself on the spot. Abuse it, and the coat will metamorphose itself to thrive on the abuse. Not a threadbare green, it is a lush technicolor coat, a flamboyant robe surrounding the colossal corporeality of the planet. 
In practice, it is an everlasting coat. The great secret which life has kept 
from us is that once born, life is immortal. Once launched, it cannot be eradicated. 
Despite the rhetoric of radical environmentalists, it is beyond the power of 
human beings to wipe the whole flood of life off the planet. Mere nuclear bombs would do little to halt life in general, and might, in fact, increase the nonhuman versions.
There must have been a time billions of years ago when life crossed the 
threshold of irreversibility. Let's call that the I-point (for irreversible, or immortal). Before the I-point life was tenuous; indeed it faced a steep uphill slope. Frequent meteor impacts, fierce radiation, and harsh temperature fluctuations on Earth four billion years ago created an incredibly hostile environment for any half-formed, about-to-replicate complexity. But then, as Lovelock tells the story, "very early in the history of the planet, the climate conditions formed a window of opportunity just about right for life. 
Life had a short period in which to establish itself. If it failed, the whole system for future life failed."
But once established, life stuck fast. And once past the I-point life turned out 
to be neither delicate nor fragile, but hardy and irrepressible. Single cell bacteria are astonishingly indomitable, living in every possible antagonistic environment one could imagine, including habitats doused with heavy radiation. As hospitals know, it is frustratingly difficult to rid a few rooms of bacterial life. The Earth? Ha!
We should heed the unstoppable nature of life, because it has much to do 
with the complexity of vivisystems. We are about to make machines as complex as grasshoppers and let them loose in the world. Once born, they won't go away. Of the thousands of computer viruses cataloged by virus hunters so far, not one species of them has gone extinct. According to the companies that write antiviral software there are several dozens of new computer viruses created per week. They'll be with us for as long as we have computers.
The reason life cannot be halted is that the complexity of life's dynamics has 
exceeded the complexity of all known destructive forces. Life is far more complex than nonlife. While life can serve as an agent of death-predator chomping on prey- the consumption of one life form by another generally does not diminish complexity in the whole system and may even add to it.
It takes, on average, all the diseases and accidents of the world working 24 
hours a day, 7 days a week, with no vacations, about 621,960 hours to kill a human organism. That's 70 years of full-time attack to break the bounds of human life-barring the intervention of modern medicine (which may either accelerate or hinder death, depending on your views). This stubborn persistence in life is directly due to the complexity of the human body. 
In contrast, a well-built car that managed to puff its way to an upper limit of 
200,000 miles before blowing a valve would have run for about 5,000 hours. A jet turbine engine may run for 40,000 hours before being rebuilt. A simple light bulb with no moving parts is good for 2,000 hours. The longevity of nonliving complexity isn't even in the same league as the persistence of life.
The museum at the Harvard Medical School dedicates a display case to the 
"crowbar skull." This skull reveals a hole roughly gouged by a speeding iron bar. The skull belonged to Phineas Gage, a 19th-century quarry foreman who was packing a black powder charge into a hole with the iron bar when the powder exploded. The iron bar pierced his head. His crew sawed off the protruding bar before taking him to an ill-equipped doctor. According to anecdotes from those who knew him, Gage lived for another 13 years, more or less functional, except that after the accident he became short-tempered and peevish. Which is understandable. But the machine kept going.People who lack a pancreas, a second kidney, a small intestine, may not run 
marathons, but they live. While debasement of many small components of the body-glands in particular-can cause death to the whole, these parts are heavily buffered from easy disruption. Indeed, warding off disruption is the principal property of complex systems.
Animals and plants in the wild regularly survive drastic violence and injury. 
The only study I know that has tried to measure the rate of injury in the wild focused on Brazilian lizards and concluded that 12 percent of them were missing at least one toe. Elk survive gunshot wounds, seals heal after shark bites, oak trees resprout after decapitation. In one experiment gastropods whose shells were deliberately crushed by researchers and returned to the wild lived as long as uninjured controls. The heroic achievement in nature is not the little fish that gets away, but that old man death is ever able to crash a system. 
Networked complexity inverts the usual relation of reliability in things. As an 
example, individual switch parts in a modern camera may have 90 percent dependability. Linked dumbly in a series, not in a distributed way, the hundreds of switches would have great unreliability as a group-let's say they have 75 percent dependability. Connected right-each part informing the others-as they are in advanced point-'n'-shoots, the reliability of the camera counter intuitively rises as a whole to 99 percent, exceeding the reliability of the individual parts (90 percent). 
But the camera now has new subgroups of parts which act like parts 
themselves. More virtual parts means the total possibility for unpredictable behavior at the component level increases. There are now novel ways to go wrong. So while the camera as a whole is utterly more dependable, when it does surprise, it can often be a very surprising surprise. The old cameras were easy to fail, easy to repair. The new cameras fail creatively.
Failing creatively is the hallmark of vivisystems. Dying is difficult, but there 
are a thousand ways to do it. It took two hundred overpaid engineers two weeks of emergency alert work to figure out why the semi-alive American telephone switching system repeatedly failed in 1990. And these are the guys who built it. It had never failed this way, and probably won't fail this way again. 
While every human is born pretty much the same, every death is different. 
If coroner's cause-of-death certificates were exact, each one would be unique. Medicine finds it more instructive to round off the causes and classify them generally, so the actual idiosyncratic nature of each death is not recorded.
A complex system cannot die simply. The members of a system have a 
bargain with the whole. The parts say, "We are willing to sacrifice to the whole, because together we are greater than our sum." Complexity locks in life. The parts may die, but the whole lives. As a system self-organizes into 
greater complexity, it increases its life. Not the length of its life, but its lifeness. It has more lives.
We tend to think of life and death as binary; a creature is either off or on. 
The self-organizing subsystems in organisms suggest, though, that some things are more alive than others. Biologist Lynn Margulis and others have pointed out that even a cell has lives in plural, as each cell is a historical marriage of at least three vestigial forms of bacteria.
"I am the most alive among the living," crows the Russian poet A. Tarkovsky 
(father of the filmmaker). That's politically incorrect, but probably true. There may be no real difference between the aliveness of a sparrow and a horse, but there is a difference of aliveness between a horse and a willow tree, or between a virus and a cricket. The greater the complexity of a vivisystem, the more life it may harbor. As long as the universe continues to cool down, life will build up in more curious varieties and in further mutual networks.

I head up the hill behind my house one more time. I ramble over to a grove 
of eucalyptus trees, where the local 4-H club used to keep its beehives. The 
grove snoozes in moist shade this time of day; the west-facing hill it stands on blocks the warm morning sun. 
I imagine the valley all rock and barren at history's start-a hill of naked flint 
and feldspar, desolate and shiny. A billion years flicker by. Now the rock is clothed with a woven mat of grass. Life has filled a space in the grove with wood reaching higher than I can. Life is trying to fill the whole valley in. For the next billion years, it will keep trying new forms, erupting in whatever crevice or emptiness it can find. 
Before life, there was no complex matter in the universe. The entire universe 
was utterly simple. Salts. Water. Elements. Very boring. After life, there was much complex matter. According to astrochemists, we can't find complex molecules in the universe outside of life. Life tends to hijack any and all matter it comes in contact with and complexify it. By some weird arithmetic, the more life stuffs itself into the valley, the more spaces it creates for further life. In the end, this small valley along the northern coast of California will become a solid block of life. In the end, left to its own drift, life may infiltrate all matter. 
Why isn't the Earth a solid green from space? Why doesn't life cover the 
oceans and fill the air? I believe the answer is that if left alone, the Earth will be solid green someday. The conquest of air by living organisms is a relatively recent event, and one not yet completed. The complete saturation of the oceans may have to wait for rugged mats of kelp to evolve, ones able to withstand storm waves. But in the end, life will dominate; the oceans will be green.
The galaxy may be green someday too. Distant planets now toxic to life 
won't always remain so. Life can evolve representations of itself capable of thriving in environments that seem hostile now. But more importantly, once one variety of life has a toehold in a place, the inherently transforming nature of life modifies the environment until it is fit for other species of life. 
In the 1950s, the physicist Erwin Schrödinger called the life force 
"negentropy" to indicate its opposite direction from the push of thermal decay. In the 1990s, an embryonic subculture of technocrats thriving in the 
U.S. calls the life force "extropy."
"Extropians," as promoters of extropy call themselves, issued a seven-point 
lifestyle manifesto based on the vitalism of life's extropy. Point number three is a creed that states their personal belief in "boundless expansion"-the faith that life will expand until it fills the universe. Those who don't believe this are tagged "deathists." In the context of their propaganda, this creed could be read as mere pollyanna self-inspiration, as in: We can do anything! 
But somewhat perversely I take their boast as a scientific proposition: life 
will fill the universe. Nobody knows what the theoretical limits to the infection of matter by life would be. Nor does anybody know what the maximum amount of life-enhanced matter that our sun could support is. 
In the 1930s, the Russian geochemist/biologist Vernadsky wrote, "The 
property of maximum expansion is inherent to living matter in the same manner as it is characteristic of heat to transfer from more heated to less heated bodies, of a soluble substance to dissolve in a solvent, and of a gas to dissipate in space." Vernadsky called it "pressure of life" and measured this expansion as velocity. His record for the velocity of life expansion was a giant puffball, which, he said, produced spores at such a rate that if materials were provided fast enough for the developing fungus, in only three generations puffballs would exceed the volume of Earth. He calculated by some obscure method that the life force's "speed of transmission" in bacteria is about 1,000 kilometers per hour. Life won't get far in filling up the universe at that rate. 
When reduced to its essentials, life is very close to a computational function. 
For a number of years Ed Fredkin, a maverick thinker once associated with MIT, has been spinning out a heretical theory that the universe is a computer. Not metaphorically like a computer, but that matter and energy are forms of information processing of the same general class as the type of information processing that goes on inside a Macintosh. Fredkin disbelieves in the solidity of atoms and says flatly that "the most concrete thing in the world is information." Stephen Wolfram, a mathematical genius who did pioneering work on the varieties of computer algorithms agrees. He was one of the first to view physical systems as computational processes, a view that has since become popular in some small circles of physicists and philosophers. In this outlook the minimal work accomplished by life resembles the physics and thermodynamics of the minimal work done in a computer. Fredkin and company would say that knowing the maximum amount of computation that could be done in the universe (if we considered all its matter as a computer) would tells us whether life will fill the universe, given the distribution of matter and energy we see in the cosmos. I do not know if anyone has made that calculation.
One of the very few scientists to have thought in earnest about the final 
destiny of life is the theoretical physicist Freeman Dyson. Dyson did some rough calculations to estimate whether life and intelligence could survive 
until the ultimate end of the universe. He concluded it could, writing: "The numerical results of my calculations show that the quantities of energy required for permanent survival and communication are surprisingly modest....[T]hey give strong support to an optimistic view of the potentialities of life. No matter how far we go into the future, there will always be new things happening, new information coming in, new worlds to explore, a constantly expanding domain of life, consciousness and memory."
Dyson has taken this further than I would have dared. I was merely 
concerned about the dynamics of life, and how it infiltrates all matter, and how nothing known can halt it. But just as life irretrievably conquers matter, the lifelike higher processing power we call mind irrevocably conquers life and thus also all matter. Dyson writes in his lyrical and metaphysical book, Infinite in All Directions:
It appears to me that the tendency of mind to infiltrate and control matter is 
a law of nature....The infiltration of mind into the universe will not be permanently halted by any catastrophe or by any barrier that I can imagine. If our species does not choose to lead the way, others will do so, or may have already done so. If our species is extinguished, others will be wiser or luckier. Mind is patient. Mind has waited for 3 billion years on this planet before composing its first string quartet. It may have to wait for another 3 billion years before it spreads all over the galaxy. I do not expect that it will have to wait so long. But if necessary, it will wait. The universe is like a fertile soil spread out all around us, ready for the seeds of mind to sprout and grow. Ultimately, late or soon, mind will come into its heritage. What will mind choose to do when it informs and controls the universe? That is a question which we cannot hope to answer.

About a century ago, the common belief that life was a mysterious liquid 
that infused living things was refined into a modern philosophy called 
vitalism. The position which vitalism held was not very far from the meaning in the everyday phrase, "She lost her life." We all imagine some invisible substance seeping away at death. The vitalists took this vernacular meaning seriously. They held that while the essential spirit stirring in creatures was not itself alive, neither was it wholly an inanimate material or mechanism either. It was something else: a vital impulse that existed outside of the creature it animated.
My description of the aggressive character of life is not meant to be a 
postmodern vitalism. It is true that defining life as "an emergent property contingent upon the organization of inanimate parts but not reducible to them" (the best that science can do right now), comes very close to sounding like a metaphysical doctrine. But it is intended to be testable.
I take the view that life is a nonspiritual, almost mathematical property that 
can emerge from networklike arrangements of matter. It is sort of like the laws of probability; if you get enough components together, the system will behave like this, because the law of averages dictates so. Life results when anything is organized according to laws only now being uncovered; it follows rules as strict as those that light obeys. 
This lawful process coincidentally clothes life in a spiritual looking garb. One 
reason is that this organization must, by law, produce the unpredictable and novel. Secondly, the result of organization must replicate at every opportunity, giving it a sense of urgency and desire. And thirdly, the result can easily loop around to protect its own existence, and thus it acquires an emergent agenda. Altogether, these principals might be called the "emergent" doctrine of life. This doctrine is radical because it entails a revised notion of what laws of nature mean: irregularity, circular logic, tautology, surprise.
Vitalism, like every wrong idea, contains a useful sliver of truth. Hans 
Driesch, the arch twentieth-century vitalist, defined vitalism in 1914 as "the theory of the autonomy of the process of life," and in certain respects he was right. Life in our dawning new view can be divorced from both living bodies and mechanical matrix, and set apart as a real, autonomous process. Life can be copied from living bodies as a delicate structure of information 
(spirit or gene?) and implanted in new lifeless bodies, whether they are of organic parts or machine parts.
In the history of ideas, we have progressively eliminated discontinuities from 
our perception of our role as humans. Historian of science David Channell summarizes this progression in his book The Vital Machine: A Study of Technology and Organic Life. 
First, Copernicus eliminated the discontinuity between the terrestrial world 
and the rest of the physical universe. Next, Darwin eliminated the discontinuity between human beings and the rest of the organic world. And most recently, Freud eliminated the discontinuity between the rational world of the ego and the irrational world of the unconscious. But as [historian and psychologist Bruce] Mazlish has argued, there is one discontinuity that faces us yet. This "fourth discontinuity" is between human beings and the machine.
We are now crossing the fourth discontinuity. No longer do we have to 
choose between the living or the mechanical because that distinction is no longer meaningful. Indeed, the most meaningful discoveries in this coming century are bound to those that celebrate, explore, and exploit the unified quality of technology and life.
The bridge between the worlds of the born and the manufactured is the 
perpetual force of radical disequilibrium-a law called life. In the future, the essence that both living creatures and machines will have in common-that which will distinguish them from all other matter in the universe-is that they both will have the dynamics of self-organized change.
We can now take the premise that life is a something in flux that is obeying 
laws which humans can uncover and recognize, even if we can't understand them fully. As a way to discover the commonalty between machines and creatures in this book, I've found it useful to ask, What does life want? I also consider evolution in the same way. What does evolution want? Or to be more precise, What does the world look like from life and evolution's point of view? If we consider life and evolution as "autonomous processes," then what are their selfish goals? Where are they headed? What are they becoming? 
Gretel Ehrlich writes in her lyrical book Montana Spaces : "Wildness has no 
conditions, no sure routes, no peaks or goals, no source that is not instantly becoming something more than itself, then letting go of that, always becoming. It cannot be stripped to its complexity by cat scan or telescope. Rather, it is a many-pointed truth, almost a bluntness, a sudden essence like the wild strawberries strung along the ground on scarlet runners under my feet. Wildness is source and fruition at once, as if every river circled round, the mouth eating the tail-and the tail, the source..."There is no purpose, other than itself, to wildness. It is both "source and 
fruition," the mingling of cause and effect in circular logic. What Ehrlich calls wildness, I call a network of vital life, an outpouring of a nearly mechanic force that seeks only to enlarge itself, and that pushes its disequilibrium into all matter, erupting in creatures and machines alike.
Wildness/life is always becoming, Ehrlich says. Becoming what? Becoming 
becoming. Life is on its way to further complications, further deepness and mystery, further processes of becoming and change. Life is czircle of becoming, an autocatalytic set, inflaming itself with its own sparks, breeding upon itself more life and more wildness and more "becomingness." Life has no conditions, no moments that are not instantly becoming something more than life itself.
As Ehrlich hints, wild life resembles that strange loop of the Uroborus biting 
its tail, consuming itself. But in truth, wild life is the far stranger loop of a snake releasing itself from its own grip, unmouthing an ever fattening tail tapering up to an ever increasingly larger mouth, birthing an ever larger tail, filling the universe with this strangeness.