RISING FLOW 
Heat was a profound puzzle in the early 19th century. Everyone 
intuitively knew that a hot object cooled to its surroundings and a cool 
object likewise warmed up. But a comprehensive theory of how heat really worked eluded scientists. 
A real theory of heat had to explain some weird happenings. Yes, a very hot 
object and a very cold object in a room would converge to the same warmth over time. But some objects, like a basin of ice and water mixture, would not warm up equally fast as the same basin of all ice or all water. Hot things expanded; cold things contracted. Motion could disappear into heat. Heat could spark motion. And when certain metals were heated, they gained weight, so therefore, heat had weight. 
The early explorers into heat had no idea that they were investigating 
temperature, calories, friction, work, efficiency, energy and entropy-all terms they were to invent later. For many decades no one was sure what it was they were actually studying. The most accepted theory among them was that heat was an all-pervading elastic fluid-a material ether. 
In 1824, the French military engineer Carnot (rhymes with Godot, the tardy 
lead in Samuel Beckett's play) derived a principle that later became known as the Second Law of Thermodynamics. Roughly paraphrased it goes thus: all systems everywhere run down over time. Together with the First Law (that energy is conserved overall), Carnot's Second Law was the key framework in the following century for understanding not only heat but most of physics, chemistry, and quantum mechanics. In short, the theory of heat undergirds all of modern physical science.
Biology, however, has no grand theory. The joke currently making the 
rounds of complexity researchers is that biological science today is "Waiting for Carnot." Theoretical biologists feel equivalent to the 19th-century thermalists just before the advent of thermal dynamics. Biologists talk about complexity without having a measure for complexity; they hypothesize about evolution without having a second instance of it. That reminds them of discussing heat without having the concepts of calories, friction, work, or even energy. Just as Carnot framed physics by his overarching law of heat death and plunge to disorder, some theoretical biologists hope for a Second Law of Biology, which would frame the overarching tendency of life to find order amid disorder. There is a touch of satire within the joke, because in 
Beckett's notorious play, Godot is a mysterious figure who never shows up!
The search for a Second Law of Biology, a law of rising order, is 
unconsciously behind much of the search for deeper evolutions and the quest for hyperlife. Many postdarwinians doubt that natural selection alone is powerful enough to offset Carnot's Second Law of Thermodynamics. Yet, we are here, so something has. They are not sure what they are looking for, but they intuitively feel that it can be stated as a complementary force to entropy. Some call it anti-entropy, some call it negentropy, and a few call it extropy. Gregory Bateson once asked: "Is there a biological species of entropy?"
This quest for the secret of life is not usually made explicit in scientists' 
formal papers. Yet in conversations with them late at night, this is what many of them feel. They allude to a vision only half-glimpsed. Each sees a different part, like the blind men patting an elephant. They hunt for cautious scientific words to cover their beliefs and hunches. The vision they hint at, I synthesize thus:
From the crack of the big bang a hot universe runs down for ten billion years 
or so. About two-thirds along into its history something clicks, and an insatiable force begins hijacking the slipping heat and order into local areas of higher order. The remarkable thing about this hijacker is that (a) it is self-sustaining, and (b) it is self-reinforcing: the more of it around, the more it makes of itself. 
Two currents were thus born out of the white flash. One current runs 
downhill all the way. This force begins as a wild hot party and fizzes out into silent coldness. This dive is Carnot's depressing Second Law, a ghoulish rule if there ever was one: all order will eventually succumb to chaos, all fire will die, all variety goes bland, all structure will eventually extinguish itself.
The second current runs in parallel, but with opposite effect. It diverts the 
heat before the heat disperses (since disperse it must) and extracts order out of disorder. It borrows the failing energy and raises the ante into a rising flow. 
The rising flow uses its short moment of order to snatch whatever 
dissipating power it can to build a platform upon which to extract the next round of order. It saves nothing and spends all. It invests all the order it has to amplify the next round of complexity, growth, and order. In this way it taps chaos to breed antichaos. We call it life.
The rising flow is a wave: a slight rise amid a degrading sea of entropy; a 
sustainable crest always falling upon itself, forever in the state of almost-toppled.The wave is a moving edge throughout the universe, a thin line between the 
plunging sides of chaos. One side slopes away to frozen gray solidness, the other slips into overexcited black gaseousness. The wave is the eternally moving moment between the two-the eternal liquid. The gravity of entropy cannot be defied; but as the crest forever falls, biological order rides it down like a surfer. 
The order accumulated by the rising wave serves as a plank to extend itself, 
using energy from outside, into the next realm of further order. As long as Carnot's force flows downhill and cools the universe, the rising flow can steal heat to flow uphill in places, building itself high by pulling on its bootstraps.
Like a pyramid scheme, or building a castle in the air, the game of 
leveraging order as a means to buy more order is a game that's got to keep expanding or collapse. Our collective history as living beings is the story of a trickster who has found a foolproof gimmick and is pulling a fast one-and getting away with it so far. "Life might be defined as the art of getting away with it," said the theoretical biologist C. H. Waddington. 
Perhaps this rather broadly poetic vision is mine alone, a vision which I have 
mistakenly read into the comments of others. But I don't think so. I have heard strands of it from too many scientists. Nor do I think it is pure mysticism any more than one would call Carnot's Law mysticism. Sure, the story is couched in human hope, but the hope I share is to find a falsifiable scientific law. Although there have been theories akin to the rising flow that were outright vehicles for vitalism, a second force doesn't have to be any less scientific than the laws of probability or Darwin's force of natural selection.
Still, an air of hesitancy blocks the vision of the rising flow. It stirs up larger 
concerns, chiefly that a Rising Flow implies a directional charge within the universe. While the rest of the universe runs down, hyperlife steadily proceeds in the contrary direction up the universe. Life progresses toward more life, more kinds of life, more complexity of life, more something. At this point skepticism sets in. A modern intellectual detects the scent of progress. 
Progress smells of human-centeredness. To some it stinks of religiosity. 
Among the earliest and most fervent supporters of Darwin's scandalous theories were Protestant theologians and seminarians. Here was scientific proof of the dominant status of mankind. Darwinism offered a beautiful model for the orderly march of insentient life toward the peak of known perfection: the human male. 
The continuing abuse of Darwin's theories to bolster racism didn't help the 
notion of evolutionary "progress" either. More important in the story of progress's demise has been the wholesale downshift of human position from the center of the cosmos to an insignificant wisp on the edge of an insignificant spiral in a dusty corner of the universe. If we are marginal, then 
what progress can evolution have?
Progress is dead, and there is nothing to replace it. The death of progress is 
nearly official in the study of evolution, as well in postmodern history, economics, and sociology. Change without progress is how we moderns see our destiny.
A theory of a second force rekindles the possibility of progress and raises 
troublesome questions: If there is a second law of life-a rising flow-what is it flowing toward? What direction could evolution have if indeed it has a direction? Does life progress, or just wander? Perhaps evolution has a mere slope, which shapes its possibilities and makes it partially predictable? Does the evolution of life (both organic and artificial) follow even small trends? Do human culture and other vivisystems mirror organic life, or can one variety progress without the others? Would an artificial evolution have its own agenda and goals completely outside the desires of its creators?
Our first answer would have to be that all progress seen in life and society is 
a human-induced illusion. The prevalent notion of a "ladder of progress" or a "great chain of being" in biology doesn't hold up under the facts of geological history. 
Start with the first instance of life as the initial point. In a visual metaphor, 
imagine all descendants of that first life forming a slowly inflating sphere. The radius is time. Each creature alive at a given time becomes a spot on the surface of the sphere at that time. 
At the 4-billion-year mark (today's date), the globe of life on Earth shows 
some 30 million species cramming its circumference. One dot, for example, represents humans; another dot on far side of the sphere, the bacterium E. coli. All points on the sphere are equidistant from the first life; therefore none is superior to the other. All creatures on the globe at any one time are equally evolved, having engaged in evolution for an equal amount of time. To put it bluntly, humans are no more evolved than most bacteria.
Gazing at this spherical graph, it is hard to imagine how one spot, the 
humans, could somehow be the apex of the entire globe. Perhaps any of the other 30 million coevolved spots-say, the flamingo, or poison oak-are the whole point of evolution. As life explores new niches, the whole globe expands, increasing the number of coevolved positions.
The globe graph of life quietly undermines the recurring image of 
progressive evolution: that of life beginning as a blob and climbing the ladder of success to the pinnacle of humanness. That image leaves out a billion other ladders that should be in the picture, including the all-too-common story of life as a blob climbing a ladder-going-nowhere to the pinnacle of a slightly different blob. In nature, there is no pinnacle, just a billion-spotted sphere. It doesn't matter what you do as long as you make it. 
Hanging out and staying the same works too. There are many more cases of 
species who spent their evolutionary time treading water than who spent it transforming radically. The rewards are identical, however. Both Homo sapiens and E. coli are elite cosurvivors. And neither particularly has an advantage over the other in surviving the next million years. (Actually, some pessimists give E. coli 100-to-1 odds on outliving humans, even though E. coli can currently live only in our guts.) 

While we can agree that evolutionary life exhibits no progress, perhaps it 
has a general direction? 
In a quick survey of textbooks on evolution, I couldn't find a single one with 
the word "trends" or "direction" in the index. In the heated zeal to eradicate the notion of progress in evolution, many neodarwinians have banned any notions of trends or direction in evolution whatsoever. Steven Jay Gould, one of the most outspoken naysayers about evolutionary trends, is actually one of the few biologists who even discusses the idea.
The central metaphor in Wonderful Life, Gould's entertaining book about the 
reinterpretation of the Burgess Shale fossils, is that the history of life can be thought of as a video tape. One can imagine rewinding life, and by some divine miracle, changing a pivotal scene at the beginning, and then rerunning life again from that point. This time-honored literary technique reached its apex in the all-American classic Christmas movie It's a Wonderful Life, from which Gould adapted his title. In this nearly archetypal drama, Jimmy Stewart's guardian angel replays Stewart's life without him.
If we could replay the epic story of biological life unfolding on Earth, would it 
progress in a similar story as the one we know? Would life recapitulate any of its familiar stages, or would it stun us with contrary alternatives? Gould spins a masterful narrative of why he thinks we would not recognize life on Earth if evolution could be run again.
But since we have this magical tape of life mounted in our machine, there 
are further, and perhaps more interesting, things to do with it. If we turned out the lights, flipped the cassette at random, and then played it, would a visitor from another universe be able to tell if the tape was running properly forward or unconventionally backward?
What would the screen show if we played the epic Wonderful Life in reverse? 
Let's dim the lights and see. The story opens with a glorious, bluish Earth wrapped in a very thin film of living things, some mobile, some rooted. The cast of character types totals in the millions, half of them insects. In the opening scenes, not much happens. Plants morph into endless shapes. Some larger, very agile mammal things dissolve into similar, but smaller mammal things. Lots of insects melt into other insects, while some wholly new insect creatures appear. They too gradually merge into others. If we inspect any 
single character and follow it in slow motion, it's difficult to discern much sensible change going either forward or reverse. To speed the show, we fast-forward (fast-backward to us).
The screen shows life becoming sparse on the planet. Many, but not all, of 
the animal creatures begin to shrink in size. The total number of kinds of things decreases. The plot slows down. Living creatures inhabit fewer roles, and the roles change less and less as the tape proceeds. Life steadily collapses in scope and size until it becomes small, bland, and naked to the elements. In a very boring ending, the last variety of animated things disappear as they melt into a single tiny amorphous blob. 
To review: a wide, complex, convoluted web of diverse forms just collapsed 
into a relatively simple, unitary speck of protein that mostly just copies itself.
What do you think, friend from Thor? Is the speck the alpha or the omega?Life surely has a direction of time, but beyond that, neodarwinists would 
argue, nothing is sure. Since there are no directional trends in organic evolution, nothing about life's future can be forecast. Therefore the unpredictable nature of evolution is one of the few predictions we can make about it. Neodarwinists count on evolution being unpredictable. Who could have guessed while the fishes leaped in the oceans-the "pinnacle" of life and complexity at the time-that the really momentous long-range work was being done by some ugly freaks in dried up mud pools near land? Land, what's that?
The postdarwinists on the other hand keep bringing up the word 
"inevitable." In 1952, engineer Ross Ashby wrote in his influential book Design for a Brain, "The development of life on earth must not be seen as something remarkable. On the contrary, it was inevitable. It was inevitable in the sense that if a system as large as the surface of the earth, basically polystable, is kept gently simmering dynamically for five thousand million years, then nothing short of a miracle could keep the system away from those states in which the variables are aggregated into intensely self-preserved forms,"
Real biologists cringe when "inevitable" is used in the same sentence as 
evolution. I believe the reflex is a vestigial response from the time when inevitable meant "God." But one of the few legitimate uses for artificial evolution-that even orthodox biologists will grant it-is as a test-bed for directional trends in evolution.
Might there be some fundamental constraints in the physical universe that 
channels life along a certain grain? Gould addresses this concern by comparing the possibility-space of life to the metaphor of "a very broad, low and uniform slope." Water dropped randomly onto this slope trickles down, 
eroding a chaotic path of microcanals. Newly hatched channels are reinforced as more water flows down, quickly carving out small valleys and permanently setting the location of succeeding larger canyons. 
In Gould's metaphor, each tiny groove represents the historical timeline of a 
species. The initial groove sets the course for succeeding forms of genus, family and taxa. In the beginning, where the groove meanders is totally random, but once established, the course of the following canyons are fixed. Even though he admits his metaphor has an initial slope that "does impart a preferred direction to the water dropping on top," Gould insists that nothing disrupts the sure uncertain course of evolution. In his favorite refrain, if you replay this experiment over and over again, starting with a blank slope each time, you would get a vastly different landscape of valleys and peaks each run.
The curious thing is that if you actually set up Gould's thought experiment 
as a real test in a sand box, the results suggest an alternative view. First thing you notice as you repeat the experiment over and over again, as I have, is that the landscape formations are a very limited subset of all possible forms. Many landforms we are familiar with-rolling hills, volcano cones, arches, hanging valleys-will never appear. Thus one can safely predict what general structure the valleys and subsequent canyons will take: gentle gullies. 
Second, while the starting groove begins at random in response to a random 
falling drop, the shape of further channel erosion follows a very homogeneous course. The canyon unfolds in an inevitable sequence. Continuing Gould's analogy, the initial drop is the first species on the scene; it might be any unexpected organism. Although its traits cannot be predicted, the sandbox analogy says that its descendants unfold somewhat predictably, according to trends inherent in the makeup of sand. So while there are points in evolution where results are sensitive to initial conditions (the birth of the Cambrian explosion could be one) this by no means rules out the influences of large trends.
Evolutionary trends were once promoted by prestigious biologists at the turn 
of the last century. One version is known as orthogenesis. Orthogenic (straight) life advanced in a direct line, from organism A through the alphabet of life to organism Z. A few orthogenesists in the past really thought evolution proceeded without branching: imagine a ladder climbing upwards, each species stationed on a rung, and every rung closer to heavenly perfection.
But even those orthogenesists who weren't so linear were often 
supernaturalists. They felt that evolution had direction because it was directed. The directing forces were supernatural purpose or some mysterious vital force that infused living things, or God himself. These notions were clearly outside the ken of science, so what little attraction the idea had to scientists was poisoned by its attraction to the mystical and new-agey. 
But in the last several decades, godless engineers have made machines that 
set their own goals and seem to have their own purpose. One of the first to discover self-direction within machines was Norbert Wiener, the original cybernetic man. Wiener writes in 1950: "Not only can we build purpose into machines, but in an overwhelming majority of cases a machine designed to avoid certain pitfalls of breakdown will look for purposes which it can fulfill." Wiener implied that at a certain threshold of complexity of mechanical design, emergent purpose was inevitable.
Our own minds are a society of mindless agents; purpose emerges from that 
mix in exactly the same way purpose emerges from other nonintentional vivisystems. In a very real sense, a lowly thermostat has a purpose and a direction-to find the set temperature and hold it there. Astoundingly purposeful behavior can emerge from purposeless subbehaviors cultivated in software. Rod Brooks's MIT mobots built with bottom-up designs perform complicated tasks based on decisions and goals which percolate up from simple goal-less circuits. Genghis the robot insectoid wants to climb over phonebooks.
When evolutionists shook off God from evolution, they believed they had 
shaken off any trace of purpose and direction. Evolution was a machine without a designer, a watch made by a blind watchmaker.
Yet when we actually construct very complex machines, and when we dabble 
with synthetic evolution, we find that both run by themselves and acquire a sliver of their own agenda. Is the self-organizing order-for-free that Stuart Kauffman sees in adaptive systems, and the teleological goals that Rod Brooks can grow in machines, enough to suggest that evolution-however it came about-might have also evolved some goals and directions of its own?
If we look we may find that direction and goals can emerge in biological 
evolution from a mob of directionless and goal-less parts, without invoking vitalistic or supernatural explanations. Experiments in computational evolution confirm this inherent teleogism, this self-produced "trend." Two complexity theorists, Mark Bedau and Norman Packard, have measured a number of evolutionary systems and concluded, "Just as recent studies of chaos have shown that deterministic systems could be unpredictible, we claim that deterministic systems may be teleological." For those with an ear that burns at the combined sound of "goal and evolution," it helps to consider this trait less as a conscious goal, plan, or willful purpose, and more as an "urge" or "tendency."
In the following list I suggest possible large-scale, self-generated tendencies 
in evolution. Tendencies, as I'm using the word here, are general and provide for exceptions. Not every lineage in a category will follow that trend. As an example, take Cope's Law, a principle often found in textbooks. Cope 
was a swashbuckling bone collector in the 1920s who put dinosaurs on the map in more ways than one. He was a pioneer dinosaur surveyor and a tireless promoter of these exotic creatures. Cope noticed that, overall, mammals and dinosaurs seemed to increase in size over time. When studied carefully by later paleontologists, though, his observation applies to only about two-thirds of the cases on record; one can find plenty of exceptions to his rule even in the species lines he had in mind. If Cope's law was without exceptions then the largest living things on Earth would not be "primitive" fungi as large as city blocks hiding under the forest floors. Still, there is definitely a long-term trend in evolution that small things such as bacteria have preceded big ones such as whales.

Caveats aside, I discern about seven large trends or directions emerging 
from the ceaseless, hourly toil of organic evolution. These trends, as far as 
anyone can tell, are also the seven trends that will bias artificial evolution when it goes marathon; they may be said to be the Trends of Hyperevolution: Irreversibility, Increasing Complexity, Increasing Diversity, Increasing Numbers of Individuals, Increasing Specialization, Increasing Codependency, Increasing Evolvability.
Irreversibility. Evolution doesn't back up. (Also known as Dollo's Law.) 
There are exceptions to the no-backup principle. A whale in one sense 
backed up to be a fish again. But it is the exception that proves the rule. In general, current manifestations of life do not work on invading past niches. 
Nor are hard-won attributes easily given up. It is an axiom in cultural 
evolution that technologies once invented are never uninvented. Once a vivisystem discovers language or memory it does not retreat from it. 
The presence of life also does not retreat. I am aware of no geological 
domain that organic life has infiltrated and then retreated from. Once life settles in an environment (hot springs, alpine rock, robots) it will tenaciously maintain some presence there. Life exploits the inorganic world, recklessly transforming it into the organic. "Atoms, once drawn into the torrent of living matter, do not readily leave it," writes Vernadsky.
Prelife Earth was, by definition, a sterile planet. It is commonly accepted 
that although sterile, the Earth was simmering with the ingredients life 
needed. In essence it was a global agar plate waiting to be inoculated. Think 
of a immense 8,000-mile-wide bowl of pasteurized chicken broth. One day you drop a cell into it, and the next day, by the power of exponential growth, the oceanic bowl is thick with cells. In a few decades, all varieties of 
cells have wormed their way into every nook. Even if it took a hundred 
years, that is but a nano-blink in geological time. Life is born. Blink. Life is 
irrepressible.
Having infiltrated computers, artificial life will henceforth never retreat from 
being in some computer, somewhere.Increasing Complexity. When I ask friends if evolution has a direction the 
common answer I get (if I get any at all) is "towards more complexity."
While it seems obvious to almost everyone that evolution moves toward 
greater complexity, we have few definitions of complexity that really mean anything. Modern biologists question the notion that life heads toward complexity. Steven Jay Gould has told me flatly, "The illusion of a move toward increasing complexity is an artifact. You need to build simple things first, so naturally complex things come later." 
But there are plenty of simple things nature has never made. If there was 
not a drive toward complexity, why not stop at bacteria and invent millions of more one-celled varieties. Or why not stop at fish and fill in all possible fish forms? Why make things more complicated? For that matter, why did life start out simple? There is no law we know of that says things have to get more complex.
If there is a true trend toward complexity, there must be something pushing 
it. In the last hundred years a number of theories have been proposed as to what drives apparent complexity. They could be listed by the following overlapping summaries (and the year they were first postulated):
●     Runaway replication and duplication of parts makes complexity (1871). 
●     The ruggedness of real environments causes differentiation of parts, which aggregate into complexity (1890). 
●     Complexity is more thermodynamically efficient (1960). 
●     Complexity is an inadvertent by-product of selection for other characteristics (1960). 
●     A complex organism creates a niche for more complexity around it; thus complexity is a positive feedback loop amplifying itself (1969). 
●     Since it is easier for a system to add a part than to remove a part, complexity accumulates (1976). 
●     Nonequilibrial systems accumulate complexity when they dissipate entropy, or wasted heat (1972). 
●     Chance alone produces complexity (1986). 
●     Endless arms races escalate complexity (1986). Because the term complexity is vague and unscientific at present, no one 
has done a systematic study of the fossil record to determine whether or not quantitative complexity increases over time. A few studies of particular short lineages of organisms have been done (using differing measures of complexity) and they have shown that sometimes some aspects of these creatures increase in complexity and sometimes they don't. In brief, we don't know for sure what happens as organisms apparently complexify.
Increasing Diversity. This one needs some careful clarification. One 
famous bed of fossils, the soft-bodied animals in the Burgess Shale, is 
currently forcing a rethinking of what we mean by diversity. As Gould tells in Wonderful Life, the Burgess Shale show a remarkable range of alien organisms thriving during the innovation boom of the Cambrian. These fantastic creatures are far more diverse in their basic plan than the creatures we descended from. What we see since the Burgess Shale, Gould argues, is decreasing diversity of basic plans, with vastly increasing quantities of minor gingerbreading. 
For instance, life churns out millions more kinds of insects, in ever more 
glorious modifications, but no more new kinds of things such as insects. Endless variations of trilobites, but no new classes such as trilobites. And since the Burgess Shale displays a smorgasbord of structural variety that beats the paltry choice of basic plans which life now offers in the same area, one could argue that the conventional view of diversity beginning small and ballooning over time is inverted. 
If you count diversity as significant variety, then diversity is shrinking. Some 
paleontologists are calling this more fundamental diversity of ground plan "disparity" to distinguish it from the ordinary diversity of species. There is more significant difference (fundamental disparity) between a hammer and a saw, than there is between an electric table saw and a power circular saw or all the thousands of baroque electrical appliances manufactured today. Gould puts it this way, "Three blind mice of differing species do not make a diverse fauna, but an elephant, a tree, and an ant do-even though each assemblage contains just three species." We give more weight to fundamentals of clearly different logic in recognition that it's hard to come up with really innovative basic plans (try to imagine a universal alternative to the tubular gut!). 
Because versatile basic plans are rare, when the majority of them go belly 
up, as they did after the Cambrian, never to be replaced, it's big news. This leads Gould to the "surprising fact of life's history-marked decrease in disparity followed by an outstanding increase in diversity within the few surviving designs." Take ten designs, throw away nine, and do the tenth one up in a bazillion variations, like beetles. The "cone of increasing diversity" we associate with evolution since the Cambrian, then, is more appropriately figured within the level of species diversity, because more species types are alive today than ever before.Increasing Numbers of Individuals. There are also more individual 
organisms in total living now than a billion years ago, or perhaps even a 
million years ago. Presumably life originated only once, so there was once only the first living organism of Adamlike oneness. Now there are uncounted legions. 
There is another important way the sheer number of living entities 
increases. In a hierarchical manner, supergroups and subgroups create individuals. Bees band together to form a colony, so now the number of individuals total the number of bees plus one superorganism. A person is an individual made up of millions of individual cells which may also be counted and added to the increasing total of individual lives. Each of these cells may have a parasite, thus more individuals. In many overlapping ways, notions of individuals can be nested within each other in the same limited space. So within one cubic volume, a hive of bees with cells and mites and viral infections may have more individuals than the same volume full of bacteria. As Stanley Salthe writes in Evolving Hierarchical Systems, "An indefinite number of unique individuals can exist in a finite material world if they are nested within each other and that world is expanding."
Increasing Specialization. Life starts as a process accomplishing many 
things in general. Over time a single life is differentiated into many 
individuals doing more specialized things. Just as a general egg cell differentiates through epigenesis to become a legion of specialized cells, so in evolution animals and plants split up into varieties more dependent on narrower niches. The word "evolution," in fact, originally meant the unrolling development of an egg cell into an embryonic creature. The term was only later applied to organic change over time for the first time by Herbert Spencer, who defined evolution (in 1862) as "a change from an indefinite, incoherent homogeneity, to a definite, coherent heterogeneity; through continuous differentiations and integrations." 
The trends listed above can be gathered together with increasing 
specialization to create the following broad picture: Life begins as one, simple, vague, unformed creativity which, over time becomes more and more fixed into a cloud of precise, inflexible, machinelike structures. Once differentiated, cell lines rarely revert to the more general. Once specialized, animal lines rarely revert to the more general. Over time the percentage of specialized organisms increase, the kinds of specialization increase, and the degree of specialization increases. Evolution moves toward more detail.
Increasing Codependency. Biologists have noticed that primitive 
organisms have a direct dependency on the physical environment. Some 
bacteria live inside rock; some lichens eat stone. Slight perturbations of these organisms' physical habitat have a strong impact (lichens are miners' canaries for acid-rain pollution for this reason). As life evolves it unbinds from the inorganic and interacts more with the organic. While plants are rooted directly to the earth, animals, which are rooted to the plants, are freer from the earth. Amphibians and reptiles generally fertilize their eggs and abandon them to the elements, while birds and mammals raise their 
young, and so are bound closer to life from birth. Over time the close intimacy with earth and minerals is replaced by a dependence on other living things. Parasites cuddling in the warm interior of an animal's gut may never touch anything outside of organic life. Likewise social animals: while ants may live in the ground, their individual lives are far more dependent upon the other ants than upon the soil around them. Deepening sociality is yet another form of life's increasing codependence on other life. Humans are an extreme example of increasing dependence on life rather than the abiotic. 
Evolution pulls life away from the inert and binds to itself whenever possible, 
manufacturing a great something out of nothing.
Increasing evolvability. In 1987, Cambridge zoologist Richard Dawkins 
presented a paper at the First Artificial Life Workshop entitled "The Evolution 
of Evolvability," wherein he explored the feasibility and advantages of evolution evolving itself. Around the same time Christopher Wills writing in Wisdom of the Genes, also published a scenario of how genes might control their own evolvability.
Dawkins's thinking was inspired by his attempts to create an artificial 
evolution in Biomorph Land. He realized while playing God that certain rare innovations would not only provide an immediate advantage to an individual but were "evolutionarily pregnant" and loosened up future offspring's ability to vary widely. He used the example of the first segmented animal in real life which he called "a freak ... [which was] not a dramatically successful individual." But something about animal segmentation was a watershed event that birthed a line of descendants who were champion evolvers.
Dawkins proposed a higher-level natural selection "which favors, not just 
adaptively successful phenotypes, but a tendency to evolve in certain directions, or even just a tendency to evolve at all." In other words, evolution would select not only for survivability, but also for evolvability. 
The ability to evolve does not rest in a single trait or function-such as 
mutation rate-yet a function such as mutation rate will play a role in an organism's evolvability. If a species cannot generate requisite variety, it won't evolve. Its ability to modify its body plays a role in its evolvability, as does its behavioral plasticity. The flexibility of its genome is of critical importance. Ultimately the evolvability of a species is a systems characteristic that does not dwell in any single place, just as an organism's ability to survive does not rest in any single place. 
Like all traits selected by evolution, evolvability must be accumulative. A 
weak innovation once adopted can serve as the platform for the birth of a stronger innovation. In this way, weak evolvability establishes an ongoing base for further evolvability to arise. Over the very long term, evolvability is an essential component of survivability. Thus a line of organisms with genes wired to increase evolvability would accumulate a decided ability (and 
advantage) to evolve. And so on ad infinitum.
The evolution of evolution is like getting the wish that Aladdin's lamp won't 
let you have: the wish for three more wishes. It's the power to change the rules of the game legally. Marvin Minsky noticed a similar power of change-which-changes-its-own-rules in the development of a child's mind. Minsky: "A mind cannot really grow very much by only accumulating more and more new knowledge. It must also develop new and better ways to use what it already knows. That's Papert's Principle: Some of the most crucial steps in mental growth are based not simply on acquiring new skills but on acquiring new administrative ways to use what one already knows." 
The process by which change is altered is the larger target of evolution. The 
evolution of evolution does not mean merely that the mutation rate is evolving, although it could entail this. In fact, the mutation rate is remarkably constant over time throughout not only the organic world but also the world of machines and hyperlife. (It is rare for mutation rates to go above a few percent and rare for them to drop below a hundredth of a percent. Somewhere around a tenth of a percent seems to be ideal. That means that a nonsensical wild idea once in a thousand is all that is needed to keep things evolving. Of course one in a thousand is pretty wild for some places.)
Natural selection tends to maintain a mutation rate for maximal evolvability. 
But for the same advantage, natural selection will move all parameters of a system to the optimal point where further natural selection can take place. However that point of optimal evolvability is a moving target shifted by the very act of reaching for it. In one sense, an evolutionary system is stable because it continually returns itself to the preferred state of optimal evolvability. But because that point is moving-like a chameleon's colors on a mirror-the system is perpetually in disequilibrium.
The genius of an evolutionary system is that it is a mechanism for 
generating perpetual change. Perpetual change does not mean recurrent change, as the kaleidoscope of pedestrian action on a street corner may be said to endure perpetual change. That's really perpetual dynamism. Perpetual change means persistent disequilibrium, the permanent almost-fallen state. It means change that undergoes change itself. The result will be a system that is always on the edge of changing itself out of existence.
Or into existence. The capacity to evolve must be evolved itself. Where else 
did evolution come from in the first place?
If we accept the theory that life evolved from some kind of nonlife, or 
protolife, then evolution had to precede life. Natural selection is an abiological consequence; it could very well work on protoliving populations. Once fundamental varieties of evolution were operating, more complex varieties kicked in as the complexity of forms allowed. What we witness in 
the fossil record of Earthly life is the gradual accumulation of various types of simpler evolutions into the organic whole we now call evolution. Evolution is a conglomeration of many processes which form a society of evolutions. As evolution has evolved over time, evolution itself has increased in diversity and complexity and evolvability. Change changes itself.

A summary of evolution's evolution may be hypothesized as follows. In 
the beginning, evolution started as varying self-replication that produced 
enough of a population to induce natural selection. Once populations bubbled up, directed mutation became important. Next symbiosis became a major mover and shaker feeding off the change produced by natural selection. As forms grew larger, the constraints of form set in. As genomes grew in length, internal selection began to rule the genome. With the cohesion of the gene, speciation and species level selection kicked in. With organisms of sufficient complexity, behavioral and somatic evolution emerged. Eventually, when intelligence came on the scene, Lamarckian cultural evolution took over. As we humans introduce genetic engineering and self-programming robots, the makeup of evolution on Earth will continue to evolve. 
The history of life, then, is a progression through a variety of evolutions 
brought about by the expanding complexity of life. As life becomes more hierarchical-genes, cells, organisms, species-evolution shifts its work. Yale University biologist Leo Buss claims that in each stage of evolution's evolution the unit subjected to natural selection shifts the tangled hierarchy to a new level of selection. Buss writes, "The history of life is a history of different units of selection." Natural selection selects individuals; Buss says that what constitutes an individual evolves over time. As an example, billions of years ago cells were the unit of natural selection, but eventually cells banded together and natural selection shifted to selecting their group-a multicellular organism-as the individual to select upon. One way to look at this is to say what constitutes an evolutionary individual evolves. At first an individual was a stable system, then a molecule, then a cell, then an organism. What next? Ever since Darwin, many imaginative evolutionists have proposed "group selection," evolution that works on groups of species as if a species were an individual. Certain kinds of species would survive or die not because of the survivability of the organism but because of unknown qualities of its specieshood-perhaps its evolvability. 
Group selection is still a controversial idea but no less controversial than 
Buss's larger conclusion that "the major features of evolution were shaped during periods of transition between units of selection." Thus, he says, "At each transition-at each stage in the history of life in which a new self- replicating unit arose-the rules regarding the operation of natural selection changed utterly." In brief, natural evolution evolves.
Artificial evolution will likewise evolve, both artificially and naturally. We will 
engineer it to accomplish certain jobs, and we'll breed many species of artificial evolution to do particular jobs better. Many years hence, you'll be able to select a particular brand of artificial evolution out of a catalog to get just that right amount of novelty, or the perfect touch of self-guidance. But artificial evolution will also evolve with a certain bias that it shares with all evolutionary systems. Each variety will, for certain, remain out of our exclusive control and carry its own agenda.
If there truly are varieties of artificial evolution and a mixture of 
subevolutions themselves evolving within that thing we call evolution, then what are the characteristics of this larger evolution, this change of change? What are the traits of hyperevolution-both the general class of evolutions, and the greater evolution that moves through them-and where is it headed? What does evolution want?
I tally the evidence and say that evolution moves towards itself. The process of evolution gathers itself up ceaselessly and remakes itself 
over and over again in time. With every remaking, evolution becomes a process more able to alter itself. It is thus "source and fruition at once."
The mathematics of evolution is not driving it toward more flamingos, more 
dandelions, or more of any particular entity. Fecundity is a free by-product of evolution-here, have a few million frogs-rather than a goal. Instead evolution moves in the direction of actualizing itself.
Life is the substrate for evolution. Life provides the raw material of 
organisms and species which allows evolution to evolve further. Without a parade of complexifying organisms, evolution cannot evolve more evolvability. So evolution generates complexity and diversity and millions of beings and thereby gives itself room to evolve into a more powerful evolver. 
Any self-evolver must be a coyote trickster. The trickster is never satisfied in 
remaking itself. Every time it takes its tail and turns itself inside out, becoming a thing more convoluted, more flexible, more lobed and frilled, more dependent upon itself, it rests less and less before it grabs its tail again. 
What does the universe gain by tolerating this relentless evolution 
accumulating ever more evolvability? 
Possibilities, as far as I can see. And, possibilities suit me fine as a destination.continue... 
  
 
Out of Control