THE STRUCTURE OF ORGANIZED CHANGE 
Open any book on evolution, and the pages flow with stories of change. 
The terms adaptation, speciation, mutation are all the jargon of 
transformation-of differences over time. Through the language of change, which evolution science has given us, we tell our history as one of alterations, metamorphosis, and novelty. "New" is our favorite word.
But rare is the book on evolution theory that tells the story of steadfastness. 
The index will not list stasis, or fixity, or stability, or any of the jargon of permanence. Despite the overwhelming fact that evolution spends almost all of its time not changing very much, teachers and textbooks are silent on the ways of constancy. 
The dinosaur is the undeserved emblem of unwillingness to change. We see 
the towering beast in our mind: with slack-jaw stupidity it gawks at the birdy things flittering around its sluggish feet. Don't be a dinosaur! we admonish the timid. Don't be steamrolled by progress! we tell the slow. Adapt or flatten. 
When I type in the word "evolution" into my library's online card catalog I 
get a list of book titles such as these:
The Evolution of Language in China The Evolution of Music The Evolution of Political Parties in Early United States The Evolution of Technology The Evolution of The Solar System 
It is evident that "evolution," as used in these titles, is a common vernacular term meaning incremental change over time. But what in the world doesn't alter gradually? Nearly all change around us is incremental. Catastrophic change is rare, and continual catastrophic change over long periods is almost unknown. Is all long-term change evolutionary?
Some people take it that way. The charter of the Washington Evolutionary 
Systems Society, a lively national association of 180 members in the science and engineering professions, considers any and all systems as evolutionary, "placing no constraint on the type of system to be explored.... All that we see about us and experience are the products of ongoing evolutionary processes." A perusal of the topics they consider evolutionary-"evolution of objectivity, evolution of business firms"-prompted me to ask Bob Crosby, 
the Society's founder, "Are there any systems you don't consider evolutionary?" His reply: "We don't see anywhere where there isn't evolution." I have tried to avoid using this meaning of the word in this book, but I haven't been perfect.
Despite the confusion about the word "evolution," our strongest terms of 
change are rooted in the organic: grow, develop, evolve, mutate, learn, metamorphose, adapt. Nature is the realm of ordered change. 
Disordered change is what technology has been about until now. The strong 
term for disordered change is "revolution"-a type of drastic discontinuous change peculiar to human-made things. There are no revolutions within nature.
Technology introduced the concept of revolution as an ordinary mode of 
change. Beginning with the Industrial Revolution, and its spillovers the French and American Revolutions, we've seen an uninterrupted series of revolutions brought on by technological advances-the revolutions of electrical appliances, of antibiotics and surgery, of plastic, of highways, of birth control, and so on. These days, revolutions, both social and technological, are announced weekly. Genetic engineering and nanotechnology-technologies which, by definition, mean we can make anything we desire-promise revolutions daily.
But daily revolution, I predict, will be headed off by daily evolution. The last 
revolution in technology will be to embrace evolutionary change. Science and commerce now seek to capture change-to instill it in a structured way-so that it works steadily, producing a constant tide of microrevolutions instead of dramatic and disruptive macrorevolutions. How can we implant change into the artificial so that it is both ordered and autonomous? 
The science of evolution is no longer valuable only to biologists, but to 
engineers as well. Artificial evolution arises in our environment; but just as important, the study of evolution (both natural and artificial) rises in our esteem. Alvin Toffler was the first futurist to bring to public consciousness the fact that not only are technological and cultural things changing fast, but the rate of change itself seems to be accelerating. We live in a world of constant change, and we need to understand it. We don't understand natural evolution very well. With our recent invention of artificially natural evolution, and its study, we can understand organic evolution better, and we can better manage, inocculate, and anticipate change in our made world. Artificial evolution is the second course in a new biology of creatures, and the first course in a new biology of machines.
The goal is to make, say, a car that adjusts its frame and wheels to fit the 
kind of road it's on, to make a road aware of its conditions to repair itself, to make a car factory flexible to produce a personalized car to fit each customer, to make a highway system aware of traffic to minimize it, and to 
make a city learn to balance the traffic it absorbs. Each of these impute to technology the ability to change itself.
But rather than continually pump in bits of change, we'd like to implant the 
intact heart of change-an adaptive spirit-into the core of the system itself. This magic ghost is artificial evolution. In stronger doses evolution breeds artificial intelligence, and in dilute form it promotes mild adaptation. Either way, evolution is the broad self-guiding force that machines still lack in larger doses.
The postmodern mind accepts on faith the once disturbing notion that 
evolution is blind towards the future. After all, we humans are incapable of anticipating all our future needs-and we claim to be above average in the looking-ahead department. The irony is that evolution is even more ignorant than we knew: it is blind both coming and going. Blind not only to how things might be, but also to how they are now and were in the past. Nature doesn't know what it did yesterday, doesn't care. It keeps no audited record of successes, of smart moves, of things that helped. We-all organisms-are a historical record of sorts, but our history is not easy to unravel or decipher without great intelligence.
An ordinary organism hasn't the faintest notion of the details operating in its 
lower levels. A cell is a bimbo in terms of what it can relate about its own genes. Both plants and animals are small pharmaceutical factories, casually churning out biochemicals that would make Genentech drool, but neither a cell, nor an organ, nor an individual, nor a species keeps track of these achievements-what produces what. "It works, why worry?" is life's deepest philosophy.
When we contemplate nature as a system we don't expect consciousness, 
just bookkeeping. As far as anyone knows, there is one law biology keeps sacrosanct: The Central Dogma. The Central Dogma states that nature does no bookkeeping. More accurately it states that information travels from gene to body, but never sends an account in the opposite way-from the body back to the genes. In this way, nature is blind about its past.

If nature transmitted information in both directions within organisms, it 
would allow the possibility of Lamarckian evolution, which requires two-way 
communication between gene and its products. The advantages of Lamarckism are awesome. When an animal needs faster legs to survive, it could use body-to-gene communication to direct the genes to make faster leg muscles, and then pass that innovation on to its offspring. Evolution would accelerate madly.
But Lamarckian evolution requires an organism to have a working index to 
its genes. If the organism met a harsh environment-say extreme high altitude-it would notify all the genes in its body able to influence respiration and ask them to adjust. The body of an organism can certainly communicate that message to other organs in the body by hardwired hormone and chemical circuits. And it could communicate the same to the genes if it could pinpoint the right ones. But that is the bookkeeping chore that is missing. The body does not keep track of how it solves a problem, so it cannot pinpoint which genes to pump up the muscle on the blacksmith's biceps, or which genes regulate respiration and blood pressure. And because there are millions of genes producing billions of features-and one gene can make more than one feature and one feature can be made by more than one gene-the complexity of accounting and indexing could exceed the complexity of the organism itself.
So it isn't so much that information can't be transmitted in the body to gene 
direction, it's more that communication is blocked because messages have no distinct destination. There is no central gene-authority to direct traffic. The genome is the ultimate decentralized system-rampant redundancy, massive parallelism, no one in charge, no one looking over the shoulder of every transaction.
But what if there is some way around this? Genuine two-way genetic 
communication would light up an interesting bunch of questions: Would there be any biological advantage if such a mechanism were possible? What else would it take to have a Lamarckian biology? Could there have been a biological route to such a mechanism at one time? If it is possible, why hasn't it happened? Could we outline a working biological Lamarckism as a thought experiment?In all probability, Lamarckian biology requires a type of deep complexity-an 
intelligence-that most organisms can't reach. But where complexity is rich enough for intelligence, such as in human organisms and organizations, and their robotic offspring, Lamarckian evolution is possible and advantageous. Ackley and Littman showed that computers programmed by humans could run Lamarckian evolution.
But in the last decade, mainstream biologists have acknowledged an 
observation a few maverick biologists have preached for a century: that when an organism acquires sufficient complexity in its body, it can use its body to teach the genes what they need to know to evolve. Because this mechanism is a hybrid of evolution and learning, it has great potential in artificial realms.
Every animal's body has a built-in but limited power to adjust to different 
environments. Humans can acclimatize to life at a significantly higher elevation. Our heart rate, blood pressure, and lung capacity must and will compensate for the lower air pressure. The same changes reverse when we migrate to a lower elevation. But there is a limit to the degree to which we can acclimatize. For us, it's around 20,000 feet above sea level. Beyond this altitude, the human body cannot stretch itself for long-term habitation.
Imagine a settlement of people living high in the Andes. They have moved 
from the plains into a niche where they are not exactly best suited-the air is thin. For the thousands of years they have lived there, their hearts and lungs-their bodies-have had to work overtime to keep up with the altitude. If a "freak" should be born in their village, one whose body has a genetically more proficient way to handle the stress of high altitudes-say, a better hemoglobin variety rather than faster heartbeat-then the freak has an advantage. If the freak has children, then this trait could potentially spread through the village over generations because it is an advantage to lower stress on the heart and lungs. By the usual Darwinian dynamics of natural selection, the mutation of altitude acclimation comes to dominate the village gene pool.
On the surface there appears to be nothing but classical Darwinism at work 
here. But in order for Darwinian evolution to take place, the organism first had to survive in the niche for many generations without the benefit of genetic change. Thus it was the flexibility of the body that kept the population surviving long enough for the mutation to arise and fix itself in the gene. An adaptation spearheaded by the body (a somatic adaptation) is assimilated over time by the genes. Theoretical biologist C. H. Waddington called this transfer "genetic assimilation." Cyberneticist Gregory Bateson called it "somatic adaptation." Bateson likened it to legislative change in society-first a change is made by the people, then it is made law. Writes Bateson, "The wise legislator will only rarely initiate a new rule of behavior; more usually he will confine himself to affirming in law that which has already become the custom of the people." In the technical literature, this genetic affirmation is also known as the Baldwin effect, after J. M. Baldwin, a psychologist who first published the idea as a "New Factor in Evolution" in 
1896.
Let's say there is this other village in the mountains, this time in the 
Himalayas, in a valley called Shangri La, whose residents' bodies are able to acclimatize up to 30,000 feet-10,000 more than the Andes folks-but who are also able to live at sea level. Over generations a mutation spreads to hardwire this talent into the villagers' genes, just as it did in the Andes. Of the two alpine villages, the Himalayan population now has a body type that is more stretchable, more flexible, and therefore, in essence, more evolutionarily adaptable. It may seem like a textbook example of Lamarckism, but giraffes who can evolve the most stretch in their necks can stake out an adaptation with their bodies long enough for their genes to catch up. As long as they keep their hides adjustable to a wide range of stresses, they'll have a competitive advantage in the long run. 
The evolutionary moral is that it pays to invest in a flexible phenotype. It 
makes better sense to keep an adaptable body in service than to have a rigid body wait around for a mutation to pop up anytime an adaptation is needed. But somatic flexibility is "expensive." An organism cannot be equally flexible everywhere, and accommodating one stress will decrease its ability to accommodate another. Hardwiring is more efficient, but it takes time; for hardwiring to work, the stress must remain constant over a long period. In a rapidly changing environment, the tradeoff favors keeping the body flexible. An agile body can foreshadow, or more accurately, try out possible genetic adaptations, and then hold a steady line to them, as a hunting dog holds to a grouse. 
But the story is even more radical than it appears because it is behavior that 
moves the body. The giraffe had to first want (for whatever giraffey reasons) higher leaves, and then had to reach for them over and over again. The humans had to choose to move to more alpine villages. By behavior, an organism can scout its options, and explore its space of possible adaptations. 
Waddington said genetic assimilation, or the Baldwin effect, was about 
converting acquired traits into inherited traits. What it really comes down to is the natural selection of traits controls. Genetic assimilation bumps up the reach of evolution a notch. Instead of being able to tune the dial to the best trait, somatic and behavioral adaptation gives evolution quicker control over what the dials are and how far and in what direction they turn.
Behavioral adaptation works in other ways, too. Naturalists have verified 
that animals are constantly roaming out of their adapted environment and taking up homes in areas where they "don't belong." Coyotes creep too far south, or mockingbirds migrate too far north. And then, they stay. Their genes endorse the change by assimilating an adaptation which began, perhaps, as a vague desire. What begins as vague desire can skate dangerously close to the edge of 
classical Lamarckism when it reaches individual learning. One species of finch learned to pick up a cactus needle to poke for insects. By this behavior the finch opened up a new niche to itself. By learning-perceived as a deliberate act-it altered its evolution. It is entirely possible, if not probable, that its learning will affect its genes.
Some computerists use the term "learning" in a loose, cybernetic sense. 
Gregory Bateson described the flexibility of the body as a type of learning. He saw little in its effect to distinguish the kind of search the body performed from the kind of search that either evolution or mind did. By this reckoning, a flexible body learns to acclimatize to stresses. "Learn" means adaptation within a lifetime instead of over lifetimes. The computerists make no real distinction between behavioral learning and somatic learning. What matters is that both types of adaptation search the fitness space within the lifetime of an individual.
An organism has great room to reshape itself within its lifetime. Robert Reid, 
at the University of Victoria, Canada, suggests that organisms can respond to environmental change with the following types of plasticity:
●     Morphological plasticity(An organism can have more than one body form.)
●     Physiological adaptability(An organism's tissues can modify themselves to accommodate stress.)
●     Behavioral flexibility(An organism can do something new or move.)
●     Intelligent choice(An organism can choose, or not, based on past experiences.)
●     Guidance from tradition(An organism can be influenced or taught by others' experiences.)
Each of these freedoms is a front along which the organism can search for better ways to refit itself in a coevolutionary environment. In the sense that they are adaptations within a lifetime which can later be assimilated, we can call these five options, five varieties of inheritable learning.

Only in the last couple of years has the exhilarating link between learning, 
behavior, adaptation, and evolution even begun to be investigated. Most of 
this exciting work has been performed in computer simulations. It has been more or less ignored by biologists-which is not the stigma it once was. A number of researchers such as David Ackley and Michael Littman (in 1990), and Geoffrey Hinton and Steven Nowlan (in 1987) have shown clearly and unequivocally how a population of organisms that are learning-that is, exploring their fitness possibilities by changing behavior-evolve faster than a population that are not learning. In the words of Ackley and Littman, "We found that learning and evolution together were more successful than either alone in producing adaptive populations that survived to the end of our simulation." Their organism's exploratory learning is essentially a random search of a fixed problem. But in December 1991, two researchers, Parisi and Nolfi, presented results at the First European Conference on Artificial Life which showed that self-guided learning-where the problem task is selected by the population themselves-produced optimal rates of learning, which in turn may increase adaptation. They make a bold claim, which will be heard more and more in biology, that behavior and learning are among the causes of genetic evolution.
There is a further caveat. Hilton and Nolan surmise that Baldwinism most 
likely works only on severely "rugged" problems. They say, "For biologists who believe that evolutionary spaces contain nice hills...the Baldwin effect is of little interest, but for biologists who are suspicious of the assertion that the natural search spaces are so nicely structured, the Baldwin effect is an important mechanism that allows adaptive processes within the organism to greatly improve the space in which it evolves." The organism creates its own possibilities.
"The problem with Darwinian evolution," Michael Littman told me, "is that it 
is great if you have evolutionary time!" But who can wait a million years? In the collective effort to introduce artificial evolution into manufactured systems, one way to accelerate the speed at which things evolve is to add learning to the soup. Artificial evolution will probably require a certain amount of artificial learning and intelligence to make it happen within human time scales.
Learning plus evolution is basically the recipe for culture. It may be that just as learning and behavior can pass off their information to genes, genes can 
pass their information off onto learning and behavior. The former is called genetic assimilation; the latter, cultural assimilation.
Human history is a story of cultural takeover. As societies develop, their 
collective skill of learning and teaching steadily expropriates similar memory and skills transmitted by human biology.
In this view-which is a rather old idea-each step of cultural learning won by 
early humankind (fire, hammer, writing) prepared a "possibility space" that allowed human minds and bodies to shift so that some of what it once did biologically would afterwards be done culturally. Over time the biology of humans became dependent on the culture of humans, and more supportive of further culturalization, since culture assumed some of biology's work. Every additional week a child was reared by culture (grandparent's wisdom) instead of by animal instinct gave human biology another chance to irrevocably transfer that duty to further cultural rearing. 
Cultural anthropologist Clifford Geertz sums up this hand-off: 
"The slow, steady, almost glacial growth of culture through the 
Ice Age altered the balance of selection pressures for the evolving Homo in such a way as to play a major directive role in his evolution. The perfection of tools, the adoption of organized hunting and gathering practices, the beginnings of true family organization, the discovery of fire, and most critically, though it is as yet extremely difficult to trace it out in any detail, the increasing reliance upon systems of significant symbols (language, art, myth, ritual) for orientation, communication, and self-control all created for man a new environment to which he was then obliged to adapt....We were obliged to abandon the regularity and precision of detailed genetic control over our conduct..."
But if we consider culture as its own self-organizing system-a system with its own agenda and pressure to survive-then the history of humans gets even more interesting. As Richard Dawkins has shown, systems of self- replicating ideas or memes can quickly accumulate their own agenda and behaviors. I assign no higher motive to a cultural entity than the primitive drive to reproduce itself and modify its environment to aid its spread. One way the self-organizing system of culture can survive is by consuming human biological resources. And human bodies often have legitimate motivation in surrendering certain jobs. Books relieve the human mind of long-term storage rents, freeing it up for other things, while language compresses awkward hand-waving communication into a thrifty, energy conserving voice. Over generations of society, culture would assimilate more of the functions and information of organic tissue. Sociobiologists E. O. Wilson and Charles Lumsden used mathematical models to arrive at what they call the "thousand-year rule." They calculated that cultural evolution can pull along significant genetic change so that it catches up in only a 
thousand years. They speculate that the vast changes we have seen in our culture over the last millennium could have some foundation in genetic change, even though genetic change might not be visible.
So tightly coupled are genes and culture, Wilson and Lumsden say, that 
"genes and culture are inseverably linked. Changes in one inevitably force changes in the other." Cultural evolution can shape genomes, but it can also be said that genes must shape culture. Wilson believes that genetic change is a prerequisite for cultural change. Unless the genes are flexible enough to assimilate cultural change, he believes it will not take root for the long term.
Culture follows our bodies, while our bodies follow culture. In the absence of 
culture, humans seem to lose distinctly human talents. (As somewhat unsatisfactory evidence we have the failures of "wolf children" raised by animals to develop into creative adults.) Culture and flesh, then, meld into a symbiotic relationship. In Danny Hillis's terminology, civilized humans are "the world's most successful symbionts"-culture and biology behaving as mutually beneficial parasites for each other-the coolest example of coevolution we have. And as in all cases of coevolution, it implies positive feedback and the law of increasing returns. 
Cultural learning rewires biology (to be precise, it allows biology to remodel 
itself) so that biology becomes susceptible to further culturalization. Thus, culture tends to accelerate itself. In the same way that life begets more life and more kinds of life, culture begets more culture and more kinds of culture. I mean it in a strong way, that culture produces organisms that are biologically more able to produce, learn, adapt in cultural ways, rather than biological ways. This implies that the reason we have brains that can produce culture is that culture produced brains that could. That is, whatever shred of culture resident in prehuman species was instrumental in molding offspring to produce more culture.
To the human body this accelerating evolution towards an information-based 
system looks like biological atrophy. From the view of books and learning, it looks like self-organization, culture amplifying itself at the expense of biology. Just as life infiltrates matter mercilessly and then hijacks it forever, cultural life hijacks biology. In the strong sense I'm advocating here, culture modifies our genes.
I have absolutely no biological evidence for all this. I've heard casual things 
from folks like Steven Jay Gould who says the "morphology of humans hasn't changed in the 25,000 years from Cro-Magnon," but I don't know what that means for this idea, and how true his assertion is. On the other hand, devolution is weirdly quick. Lizards and mice can lose their eyesight in a blink (so to speak) inhabiting lightless caves. Flesh, it seems to me, is ever ready to give up part of its daily grind if given a chance.My larger point is that the advantages of Lamarckian evolution are so great 
that nature has found ways to make it happen. In Darwin's metaphor I would put its success this way: Evolution daily scrutinizes the world not just to find fitter organisms, but to find ways to increase its own ability. It hourly seeks to gain an edge in adaptation. Its own ceaseless pushing creates an immense pressure-like the weight of an ocean seeking a crack to seep through-to increase its adaptive abilities. Evolution searches the surface of the planet to find ways to speed itself up, to make itself more nimble, more evolvable-not because it is anthropomorphic, but because the speeding up of adaptation is the runaway circuit it rides on. It searches for the advantages of Lamarckian evolution without realizing it because Lamarckism is a crack of less resistance and more evolvability.
When animals with complex behavior evolved, evolution began to break out 
of its Darwinian straight jacket. Animals could react, choose, migrate, adapt, and give room for the blossoming of pseudo-Lamarckian evolution. As human brains evolved, they created culture, which permitted the birth of a true Lamarckian system of inherited acquisitions.
Darwinian evolution is not just slow learning. In Marvin Minsky's words, 
"Darwinian evolution is dumb learning." What evolution later found in primitive brains is a way to quicken itself by introducing learning into the equation. What evolution eventually found in the human brain was the complexity needed to peer ahead in anticipation and direct evolution's course.

Evolution is a structure of organized change. But it is more. Evolution is a 
structure of organized change which is itself undergoing change and 
reorganization. 
Evolution on Earth has already undergone structural changes in its four-
billion-year lifespan and will probably undergo more. The evolution of evolution can be summed up by the following series of historical evolution types:
1) Auto-genesis of systems2) Replication3) Genetic control4) Somatic plasticity5) Memetic culture6) Self-directed evolution.
In the prebiotic conditions of early Earth, before there was any life to evolve, the dynamics of evolution favored the survival of anything stable. (There is a Uroboric tautology lurking here because in the very beginning stability is survival.)
Stability permitted evolution to operate longer, and so stability allowed evolution to generate further stability. We know from the work of Walter Fontana and Stuart Kauffman (see chapter 20) that a fairly straightforward chemistry of simple compounds which can catalyze their own production results in a kind of chemical self-supporting ring. The first stage of evolution was thus the evolution of a matrix of self-generating complexity, which gave evolution a population of persistent things to work on. 
At the next stage, evolution evolved self-replicating stabilities. Self- 
reproduction provided the possibility of errors and variation. Evolution then evolved natural selection and unleashed its remarkable search power.
Next, the mechanics of inheritance split from mechanics of survival, and 
evolution evolved the dual system of genotype and phenotype. By allowing a compact genotype to describe huge libraries of possible forms, evolution 
entered into a vast space to operate within.
As evolution evolved more complex body forms and behaviors, it made 
bodies that reshaped themselves and animals that chose their own niches. These choices opened up the space of bodily "learning" for evolution to evolve further.
Learning hastened the next step which was the evolution of a complex 
symbolic learning machine-the human brain. Human thinking evolved culture and memetic (idea) evolution. Evolution could now accelerate itself in a self-aware and "smarter" way through a vast new library of possibilities. This is the stage of history we are at now.
God only knows where evolution may evolve next. Will human-made 
artificial evolution set the stage for another realm of evolution? The obvious course that evolution seems bound to hit sooner or later is self-direction. In self-direction, evolution itself chooses where it wants to evolve. This is not discussed by biologists.
I prefer to rephrase this history and say that evolution has been, and will 
keep on, exploring the space of possible evolutions. Just as there is a space of possible pictures, a space of possible biological forms, and a space of possible computations, there is also a space-how large we don't know-of ways to explore spaces. This metaevolution, or hyperevolution, or deep evolution, or perhaps even ultimate evolution, wanders the landscape of all possible evolutionary games looking for the trick that will allow it to complete its search of all possible evolutions. 
Organisms, memes, biomes-the whole ball of wax-are only evolution's way 
to keep evolving. What evolution really wants-that is, where it is headed-is to uncover (or create) a mechanism that will most quickly uncover (or create) possible forms, things, ideas, processes in the universe. Its ultimate goal is not only to create forms, things, and ideas, but to create new ways in which new things are found or created. Hyperevolution does this by bootstrapping itself into a layered strategy that continually increases its reach, continually creates new libraries of possible places to explore, and continually searches for better, more creative ways to create.
That sounds like fiddle-faddle double-talk, but I don't know any less 
recursive way to say it. Perhaps: Evolution's job is to create all possible possibilities by creating the spaces in which they could be.
continue...   
 
Out of Control
The bald concept of evolution is so powerful and universal that at times it 
seems to touch everything. The mystical archeologist Teilhard de Chardin 
wrote:
Is evolution a theory, a system, or a hypothesis? It is much more-it is a general postulate to which all theories, all hypotheses, all systems must henceforth bow and which they must satisfy in order to be thinkable and true. Evolution is a light which illuminates all facts, a trajectory which all lines of thought must follow-this is what evolution is. 
Evolution's role to explain everything, however, stains it with a tinge of religiosity. As Bob Crosby of the Washington Evolutionary Systems Society unabashedly says, "Where other people see the hand of God, we see evolution." 
Much can be said of viewing evolution as a religion. Evolution theory's 
framework is encompassing, rich, almost self-evident, inarguable, and it has now spawned local home fellowships that meet monthly, as Crosby's large group does. Author Mary Midgley begins her slim and wonderful monograph Evolution as a Religion, with these four sentences: "The theory of evolution is not just an inert piece of theoretical science. It is, and cannot help being, also a powerful folk-tale about human origins. Any narrative must have symbolic force. We are probably the first culture not to make that its main function." 
Her arguments are not against the veracity of evolutionary theory in the 
least, but rather against the idea that we can divorce the logical aspects of evolution from all the other things this powerful notion does to us as humans.
It is the unexamined consequences of evolution-however it comes about, 
and wherever it is headed-that I believe will shape our future in the long term. I don't doubt that our discoveries about the hidden nature of deep evolution will also touch our souls.
continue...   
 
Out of Control